Annie Russell: Miranda Duschack and Mimo Davis’ have been farming together since 2012, supplying flowers in the St. Louis area.
At StoryCorps Miranda and Mimo told their own love story as the first lesbian couple married in Missouri. 
Miranda Duschack (MD) and Mimo Davis (MIM) 
MD: We met at work.
MIM: Right.
MD: At our day job. And then we decided to farm together…fell in love, got married, at a spiritual ceremony where we jumped the broom because we couldn’t legally be married. 
And then the second wedding was in 2014 to be legally married.
MIM: Right.
MD: Do you remember this? When we had August.  Do you remember how I pushed August out, ok…
MIM: What do you mean, do I remember that?
MD: Yeah. But they didn’t know how to fill out the birth certificate.
MIM: I do remember that.
MD: So, I was making a fact sheet to leave at the nurse’s station about how to register. Um…
MIM: It’s okay. It’s okay. You can have you some tears.
MD: I just felt like we were total freaks, man.
MIM: We weren’t freaks, we were just firsts.
MD: We were just first. And it was really embarrassing for me that we fought so hard to get married and then we got divorced. 
MIM: But, you know, that was part of the rights that we fought for.
MD: I know. I mean, I would say that to people, You know, it…
MIM: And that’s all part of the package, right? You get to be married and then you get to be divorced. I mean…
MD: Right. I was like, just like straight people. 
MIM:: Just like straight people [laughs] Right. 
MD: I can get divorced. I can get divorced. It didn’t necessarily pan out the way we thought it would be…
MIM: But we’re still in it. We’re still farming partners.
MD: We’re raising a beautiful son. These are gorgeous flowers sitting in front of us. And Mimo Davis, I’m going to say right now, I still really love you and care about you.
MIM: Of course, of course, I love you and care about you too. I mean that was never in question for me. We are both really, in our hearts and souls and deep down, totally committed to each other, and that’s why we work through all the real stuff. And I see that as a win.

Close