The StoryCorps’ Military Voices Initiative records and shares the stories of service members and their families.
In 1942, in the midst of World War 2, the Marine Corps officially opened its ranks to Black men. 
More than 19,000 Black recruits signed up …  and became known as the Montford Point Marines … Named for the North Carolina base where they trained. 
Most of these men have passed away, but through the StoryCorps Archive … we can still hear their stories … 
Transcript TRT: []
 
Mari Ann Roberts: Do you remember the first time you put on the uniform? 
Estel Roberts: I just felt like, oh, I’m a proud Marine, you know. I thought I was something. 
Benjamin Jenkins: I wanted to help fight for our country, and also show that we had the courage and intelligence to do so. 
William Pickens: We knew we were the best. Well we made it our business to be the best of the best. Not mediocre but the best. 
 
(MUSIC OUT)
HOST (SS): We’re going to hear now from Corporal Sidney Allen Francis. 
After serving as one of the first Black Marines… he worked as a New York City police detective… and in 2005 spoke with his daughter, Candice, at StoryCorps.
Sidney Francis (SF): I wanted to go into the Army, but they said no. 
Candice Francis (CF): And this was World War II? 
SF: Yeah. And they stamped my papers ‘Navy,’ and there was no way in the Hell I was going to the Navy.
CF: Why didn’t you want to go in the Navy?
SF: I didn’t like the little hats they were in, the little … [laughs] So then I said, ‘What about the Marine Corps?’ The guy says, ‘Well, you have to go ‘round and see the Sergeant Major.’ First thing he said to me: ‘Are you a high school graduate?’ I said, ‘Yes, sir.’ And I went to North Carolina for boot camp.
CF: And what was that like? 
SF: I mean, they were rough. 
CF: Now, were your drill instructors, were they white or Black? 
SF: No, they were Black. But see, they had trained under white instructors because up to 1942, the Marine Corps had no Blacks. And that’s why they were extra tough on us. They wanted us to make it. And, uh, we did.
Well, I have to tell you, I once went to jail down there. I was with my buddy from New York, he was in the Marine Corps, and we were going to Raleigh from Montford Point. And we’re sitting in the back of the bus. Then the bus stopped to pick up people, and the bus driver came up and he said, uh, ‘You guys will have to get up.’
I said, ‘Get up for what?’ He says, ‘These white people have to sit down.’ I said, ‘We’re in the back of the bus.’ He said, ‘You ought to get up.’ And I lost my head then. I says, ‘We’re not getting up.’ And lo and behold, in not even 10 minutes, in comes police with guns drawn. And they took me that night to some little prison camp. And in the morning I heard, ‘Warden, this is Major Pauper, United States Marine Corps. You got one of my boys in there.’
All the Marines from Montford Point, they were on six by six trucks with machine guns at the ready. You could see they just wanted to tear that jail down. And when I came out, Major Pauper, he says, ‘PFC Francis, you get on that truck. We’re out of here.’
And he hollered it back, ‘Thank you, Warden, that you didn’t hurt one of my Marines.’ He said, ‘You would have been in trouble.’
HOST (SS): That was Sidney Allen Francis speaking with his daughter, Candice. Sidney died February 15, 2014. His daughter recently came back to StoryCorps
Candice: So I didn’t know that story before. He had never shared that with me, but it sounded like my father. I wasn’t surprised by that at all. You know, a lot of Black men who served this country had to also suffer indignities, even while in uniform. I don’t think that they’ve gotten the credit that they deserve for putting their lives in danger.
And coming out of it with scars that didn’t come from the so-called enemy, but came from within. But what I appreciate about my father is that he used his military service to give him what he needed to build a life for himself and his family. It gave him purpose, and it gave him an anchor … And I’m grateful for that. 
***

CF: So what do you want your grandchildren to know about you? 
SF: I want them to just remember that I loved them, that’s all. There’s nothing exciting about me. I’m just a man. 
 
 

CloseQaiyaan Harcharek (QH) and Don Rearden (DR)
QH: It seemed as if we knew each other our whole lives, it’s kind of strange.
DR: Yeah, right away. I don’t think the average person can understand what it’s like to grow up in a place where you lose so many people to suicide.
QH: It’s tough.
DR: Yeah, it is. The first person that I knew intimately, who took his own life, was a teammate of mine. I was just a freshman in high school. And he had moved into Bethel to play basketball. We were good friends. 
And then that summer I found out he, you know, took his life. And then, that fall, I lost another classmate. Pretty soon it was like a whole gym full of people… that I knew personally who are gone.
QH: I could relate. 100 percent. All of my adult life, I’ve had struggles with mental health and depression, and I’m a suicide survivor… I attempted it.
However, I have this vision, I don’t – it’s hard to describe, but it was… my wife and children reaching up to me. And there were many, many silhouettes around them of people, with faces, and yours was one of them. 
DR: [chuckles]
QH: What I do know is… it was the love that I received from each and every one of those people that saved my life.

CloseHOST:
In this story – how baseball brought two strangers together and turned them into family. Ed Holley first met Kanard Lewis in 2010. Ed was coaching youth baseball in New York City… And 14-year-old Kanard was one of his players…
 
Ed Holley (EH) and Kanard Lewis (KL): 
EH: When I met you, I was like, this kid is humongous, you were probably like 5’10” and your feet were gigantic. That’s the thing that always made me smile. I was like, dang he can’t run he’s got to pick up one of them feet. 
KL: Yeah, I wasn’t fast. 
EH: You were just growing into your body. And you used to stutter.  
KL: I did! But baseball allowed me to not get bullied as much because I had some talent. And then you decided to share that you were also bullied. Now, it didn’t just become somebody talking at you, acting like they know, nah, you knew.
EH: It was more than just hitting and catching and throwing. I was teaching you about life. 
When do you think that I went from just being your baseball coach to being like family?
KL: That day, I got off the train. I was literally two blocks away from my school, when my mom called and said, “I’m in the hospital.” 
EH: I’d been in your life for a few years and because she had the health scare she wanted to make sure that somebody was going to be around to look out for her son. And I vaguely remember signing this paperwork.
KL: She made it, like legal! [Laughs]
EL: Yeah, like suddenly I was legally responsible for you! [Laughs] I mean, just to be honest, it was something that I didn’t think I was ready for. But you know what? It was you. And I felt protective of you.
I just tried to help her because she did a great job of raising you. I think I also reminded you a lot of times when you’re mad, hey, you only got one mom, bro. 
KL: I think you continue to do a solid job. Like, you know, I think it just must have been crazy to see me at 14 and then now at 27. 
EH: I see my boy going out there, reaching out to try to help humanity. I can say that, not only did I make some young men’s lives better, but they in turn have made other people’s lives better. And I couldn’t be prouder. 
 

Close