John Cruitt (JC) and Cecile Doyle (CD)
 
JC: When I returned to school, you waited until the other children left the room at the end of the day, and you told me that you were there if I needed you. And you bent over and kissed me on the head. It was really the only time someone said to me, ‘I know what you’re feeling, and I know what you’re missing.’ And I felt that things really would be OK.
 
CD: When I found out she died, I could certainly relate to that, because when I was 11, my own father died. And you just don’t know how you’re going to go on without that person.
 
JC: Many years later, when I became a teacher, I started to think to myself, ‘Here I am, with a memory of a teacher who changed my life, and I’ve never told her that.’
 
CD: And your letter could not have come at a better time because my husband had Parkinson’s and he was going downhill. And I read this beautiful letter, and I just was overwhelmed.
 
JC: Well the funny thing is, I typed the letter. I was afraid my penmanship wasn’t going to meet your standards. Well, after all this time, Mrs. Doyle, all I can say to you is, thank you.
 
 
Host: Cecile Doyle died in 2019.
 
After, John sat down with a different member of the Doyle family… Cecile’s daughter, Allison.
 
 
John Cruitt (JC) and Allison Doyle (AD)
 
JC: My relationship with you is very important to me. Because all those years I was away from your mother, 54 years, I didn’t know if she was being loved. And when I met you, it made me feel so much better. 
 
Do you remember the day we actually had the reunion?
 
AD: To see you standing in the doorway with the flowers, approaching one another… And instinctively, she gave you a kiss on the forehead.
 
JC: It was an absolutely unbelievable feeling that I had. It was like I was seeing Mrs. Doyle and I was seeing my mother at the same time.
 
AD: We had put a book together of all of the pictures of your reunion, the letter, and she would show friends. And we had that book at her funeral service. So that for me, I think, helped me through my grief… Because we get wrapped up in the person going and leaving us. And then you realize it’s about what have they left behind.  
 
JC: I’m just so grateful also that, in some small way, I was able to bring her a little bit of joy before it was too late.
 
AD: And that was in a big way John. I almost feel like you’re a brother.
 
JC: I suspect our mothers have something to do with that. 
 
AD: They might quite well. Yes, that’s something to do with that, I think. So what a gift they gave us.
 
JC: They certainly did.

CloseHOST: Recording booths are places for people to look back on their lives… and sometimes… to look ahead… to a time when they’re no longer here…
That’s the direction that this conversation took…
Conchetta Brown has Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, or C-O-P-D, and uses oxygen…
She came to StoryCorps in San Antonio with her daughter, Nidera. 
Transcript TRT: [2:14]
Nidera Brown (NB) and Conchetta Brown (CB)
NB:  If this was to be your very last conversation, is there anything you want to say to me? 
CB: I love you and I’m sorry I have to die but I have to go, girl. It was good while it lasted, but I must go. 
NB: You act like it’s the ending of a relationship [Laughs].  
CB: It is! 
NB: Well, yeah, I guess it is… but–
CB: Because no more mother and daughter. It’s just daughter, mother gone.
NB: Yeah. But you won’t have to worry about oxygen. 
CB: I know that’s the truth. No more medicine. Oh, to think–
NB: No. You just have to slow down. 
CB: Yeah, I try to do that. And then I forget what I’m doing. 
NB: Well, don’t slow down that much. 
CB: Oh… Well, what about you? What would you do?  
NB: If this was my last conversation?
CB: Yes. 
NB: Yeah, I would tell you the same thing, that I love you. 
CB: Do you want to be cremated?
NB: Yes. 
CB: Oh yeah. And where you want us to throw you? In the toilet, the garbage can? 
NB: No, not the garbage can. All that, it didn’t make no sense to get me cremated [Laughs]. 
CB: Okay, so sorry. 
NB: Just get me cremated and throw me out back?
CB: Yeah [Laughs]. We could use some soil and, you know, plant a tree.
NB: Oh yeah… That would be awesome. 
CB: Uuuhuu.
NB: Something that can give fruit, you know. 
CB: That can give back. 
NB: Yes, give it back. So for your great great grandchild listening to this years from now, is there any wisdom you want to pass on to them?
CB: You know, you don’t have to be religious to believe in something, ‘cause religion is what you do every day. And they got a song that say, ‘You don’t miss your water ‘til your well run dry.’ That’s why you’re supposed to treat people kind while they’re alive. 
NB: Yeah.
CB: And when your well dry, you want to see that person again. But it’s all over. 
NB: Yup.
CB: You know, we made do girl… Eventually, I’ve gotta go. And I know it’s gonna break your heart. I’ll be sad that I’m gone ‘cause I won’t have you to talk to. 
But it’s gonna be alright. I’mma always be with you, here.

CloseCorey Harvard has dedicated his life to helping LGBTQ youth in Mobile, Alabama. 
He grew up in a deeply religious family… and as a queer kid in the 90’s … he struggled to come out to his parents. 
At StoryCorps, he and his mom, Lisa Harvard looked back at that time…
 
Transcript TRT: [2:30]
 
Lisa Harvard (LH) and Corey Harvard (CH)
 
LH: We had no idea, we really didn’t, so we were caught off guard, as you might say. 
 
CH: But, Mom, the amount of stuff I was looking at online when I got the computer, that was just me trying to learn about what it meant to be gay. if y’all were Snoopy parents, it would have taken no time to figure it out. 
 
LH: I remember in that very first conversation, I was looking directly across from you, and you fell into your dad’s arms. I know that I was numb in a lot of ways because a big part of it was feeling separated from you, and I didn’t like that. 
 
CH: Yeah, I remember feeling that distance. I think that with where all of us were, it was inevitable.
 
LH: And during those months and a couple years there, you would come back, we would have more conversations. Of course a lot of it we may not have understood, but it didn’t leave us just reeling, we talked about those things. As we were figuring out what this was going to look like for us. 
 
CH: Mm hmm. 
 
LH: Sometimes I just go into your room, even though we’ve remodeled, we made sure not to touch that room, and I sit on your bed, and I am really so hopeful that it was a good space because I wanted you to be a happy kid.
 
CH: The truth is, I felt so loved as a kid, but, I mean, there’s a part of that journey that no one can join you on.
 
A hard thing that I’ve always wanted to share with you, the beginning of my sophomore year, I was struggling the most. And it was this dark night of the soul where it’s like, can I really accept this? Have I failed at life? And there was that one night that got really hard, and I remember sitting on the windowsill and just contemplating it, like, what would it be like for this to all be over?
 
And this feeling that I had is you, and it’s like this invisible golden lasso. And I knew that even in this worst moment of my life, that I can’t fall. And the work that I do with these kids is how I took that golden lasso and I turned it into a net. And we just keep saving people with that love that you put in me. 
 
LH: Sometimes I look at you and I just can’t fathom the kind of love that I see you give it’s a humbling experience. You came into my life and changed me in so many ways, I’m so much better now than I ever would have been without you…and I’m so grateful to be your mom.
 
BACK ANNOUNCE:
 
​That’s Corey Harvard and his mom Lisa Harvard in Mobile, Alabama.  In 2018, Corey co-founded Prism United, which provides support groups and access to therapy for LGBTQ+ youth and their families in Southwest Alabama. 

Close