HOST:
For 25 years… the Lesbian Switchboard operated in New York City… it was a helpline for women with no one to talk to about being gay… 
And if you called in the 1980s… longtime volunteer Denise Tuite [TOOT] might have answered the phone. 
At StoryCorps… she remembered what this work meant to her.
Denise Tuite (DT): The Lesbian Switchboard was located in an old school building. The room was a tiny room, and there were no windows. It was very depressing looking, to tell you the truth.  It was that old, gray, green color they used to paint schools at that time, so it looked kind of dingy. 
 
But it was our place. You know, it was beautiful. 
 
Typical calls were, I’m coming to New York, what’s the best  bar for lesbians specifically? But then every once in a while you’d get somebody that would call and just want to talk… Someone from Oshkosh, Wisconsin or something. ‘Should I tell my parents? Shouldn’t I tell my parents?’ 
 
The suicidal calls we weren’t permitted to take, ‘cause we weren’t trained for that. I had a few of those calls. ‘Don’t kill yourself, don’t be ashamed of yourself, call this number.’ That’s all we could say, really.
 
But I realized much later on, the switchboard was not only me helping other people, it was me helping me.
 
My family was very close-knit Brooklyn Irish Catholic. Church every Sunday, go to Catholic school… and I started to realize I was gay, when I was about 14. And believe it or not, at one time I was really pretty (laughs), and I had a boyfriend, but I didn’t want to be with him. And my mother? She wanted me at 16 to marry, so I could get these feelings of being a lesbian out of me.
  
She felt I was a bad influence on my younger brother and sisters. So when I graduated high school, my mother didn’t want me in the house anymore. You know, and I was still like just a kid.
 
It would have been a hell of a lot easier for me to get married, and have a family and be accepted by my mother, and loved by my mother…which… is something I wanted. But that wasn’t who I was. 
 
The impact that the switchboard had on me, I realized that a lot of people out there are like me, and now I had to tell them it was okay… there’s nothing wrong with you.
 
That’s what people wanted to hear. They wanted to hear that no matter where they were, no matter how isolated they were, there are other people like you. You know, you had to tell them that they weren’t alone. 

CloseHOST: In 1931, a young Native Hawaiian man, Joseph Kahahawai, was wrongfully accused of sexually assaulting the wife of a U.S. Navy officer …  Soon after, he was killed by her relatives.
Kim Farrant is his niece. But growing up, her family never spoke about her uncle.
At StoryCorps in Honolulu, she told her sister …  Joy Kahahawai-Welch … how she first heard the story.
 
Transcript
KF: I was in a Hawaiian history class in middle school and one of the topics was a very tragic story of a young man who was falsely accused of raping a woman and then the family kidnapped and murdered him. And they were never brought to justice.
This man had the very same name as our dad: Joseph Kahahawai. The teacher then asked me, ‘Is this your family?’ So I came home and I asked mom and she said, ‘Yeah. That is dad’s brother.’
He had just turned 23 years old right before he was killed. And then our dad was born just 11 months later. He inherited the very same name. So Dad was the new Joe… and he became the star of our family. He was like the sun that we all revolved around.
I think he knew that they wanted the name and the legacy to live on.
JK: You know… Dad innately carried himself a certain way to make his brother proud. And I remember wanting to hear more about what happened. But the gist of it was, ‘It’s just too hard to talk about.’
KF: Right. I look back and I think, ‘Oh, is there something to be ashamed of?’ But that first generation needed those years of silence and peace to heal and recover.
And it made us all hold each other more close and more dear … Like we’re this unbroken chain of family. 
JK: We pay our uncle our respects by going to the cemetery, you know? Taking care of it. 
KF: It’s a humble cemetery in the middle of Kalihi. And the plumeria tree above his grave has a lot of flowers. So fresh flowers are raining down on him daily right now. 
JK: ‘Ho’omana’o’ is on his gravestone and that’s a good reminder to never forget. Always remember.

CloseTchin <<chin>> is an artist and metalsmith. He’s created designs for brands like Cartier <<CAR-tee-yay>>.
He belongs to the Narragansett tribe. Growing up, he moved between foster homes in Rhode Island and Virginia.  
And as he told his daughter Xiao Hui Star <<shah-way-star>>, he was often one of the few Indigenous people in town.
Transcript TRT: [3:18]
 
Tchin (T) and Xiao Hui Star (XS)
T: I looked different than everybody else. There was either white people or Black people, and there was me. And so, I stood out. And the cops would stop me sometimes, even as a young kid, they would stop me and go, ‘You know, you don’t belong in this neighborhood.’
I was living in Rhode Island and Rhode Island School of Design had a, like, summer scholarships. So I entered the competition and the art teacher said, ‘They don’t want people like you.’ And uh, I stopped drawing ever since then. 
XS: Wow. 
T: Yeah. It, it, it hurt. 
XS: How old were you?
T: I might’ve been 13. 
XS: Hmm. 
T: And, uh, people would say, like, ‘You know, you’re gonna end up in jail,’ or, ‘You’re not gonna ever become anything’ or anything like that. And I was, ‘I’m gonna prove them wrong. I need to go somewhere. I need more than this.’ And I went to New York. And I slept in hallways, and I slept in the subways, and I slept in Grand Central Station.
I really couldn’t read and write very well, and, uh, when I did have jobs, I usually weren’t able to keep those jobs. And then I learned to read and write by forcing myself to read an encyclopedia. And I applied to go to an art school.
XS: I would like to hear more about how you built the confidence to pursue an artistic career, which I see as quite risky. 
T: It was a little scary, but because Mommy did so much supporting us, it wasn’t as scary as if I was the only breadwinner. And my joke was always that I did all the cooking and the sewing. And Mommy did the brickwork and the plumbing. 
And when you girls were growing up, I made it a point that we would always have family meals on the weekend. And I wanted to raise my girls as really strong, powerful women. I would always say, ‘What can I do? As a parent, to make your life better?’ You girls would say, ‘I didn’t like when you raised your voice.’ And then I would learn to not be so tough on you. But you’re navigating the world very well, all of you.
XS: I’m 38, the age that you were when you had me. What advice do you have for me? 
T: The sad thing about human beings is that we tend to remember the unhappy things. And I think my advice to you is just try to be happy. The longest life is short.
 
BACK ANNOUNCE:
 
For StoryCorps in Philadelphia, that’s Tchin and Xiao Hui Star.
Their conversation is archived in the Library of Congress.

Close