Rob Rigano (RR): My name is Rob Rigano. 
Phil Rigano (PR): And, uh, what’s your relationship to me?
RR: We’re brothers, unfortunately. Yes [laughs]
Von Diaz:  Rob Rigano lives in New York and his older brother Phil lives near San Diego.
They see each other once a year and on one of those visits in 2006 the StoryCorps airstream trailer was parked near Phil’s home.
He came back to StoryCorps reflect on their conversation.
PR: My brother, Robbie loved coming here, and our family had had an Airstream trailer, so taking Robbie to StoryCorps was a natural fit.  
PR: What’s your earliest memory, Rob? 
RR: I rolled my Uncle Charlie’s Dodge into the street light. 
PR: Wait, what happened?-
RR: Went down the driveway, I jumped out of the car, and it went down the driveway.
PR: Into a telephone pole? 
RR: Yes. [laughs] 
PR: Robbie is what they call developmentally disabled. He knew he had limits, but he had a way of just melting your heart.  
PR: Do you remember, uh, one time in, Mom’s station wagon,
RR: Yeah, I fell out. 
PR: Yeah? And what were you doing, playing with the doors while the car was driving? 
RR: No, the locks were defected. 
PR: So you weren’t playing with the door handle? 
RR: No. I think they had trouble with the locks on that particular model car.
PR: I know you had trouble with the locks  [laughs]
RR: And then another time I bit a horse. 
PR: No, you didn’t Bite a horse, Rob. 
RR: I thought I did? [Laughs]
PR: The story was you wanted to go up and pet the horse and the man said “he can pet it, the horse won’t bite” and mom said “I’m not afraid of the horse biting my son I’m afraid of what my son might do to the horse.” [laughs]
PR: Besides these shenanigans he ended up working at the Department of Public Works for 30 years. Where he got to walk around the streets picking up litter, cleaning, sweeping. And he got to know nearly every resident. He was often referred to as “the real mayor” by the people. In fact he would go around our neighborhood to look in on our older neighbors. And he would say, “well, who else is going to do it?” He just has that sense of what’s right. 
PR: What’s your happiest memory? 
RR: Well uh, my happiest memory is when dad took me to learn how to swim. But my dad’s a little excitable. 
PR: [laughs] Why do you think that is, Rob? 
RR: I think that’s his nature. 
PR: Yeah? Not your nature, maybe, you know, doing things? 
RR: No no, that’s his nature. 
PR: Rolling cars into trees? 
RR: I don’t do that anymore. 
PR: Oh okay [laughs]
PR: I was listening to this recording with my wife, and she said  “Isn’t it great to hear Robbie being Robbie again?” 
Because he came down with COVID more than once, And his illness has really taken a toll on his sense of humor. He is not as effervescent as he used to be. 
We miss those things because he was always a glue that bound the family together. He is a gem of a guy and we all helped polish him.
PR: Anything else Rob?
RR: I think that’s about it. 
PR: That’s all? 
RR: Yeah. And next year we could have stories about you.

CloseCloseHOST: In 1931, a young Native Hawaiian man, Joseph Kahahawai, was wrongfully accused of sexually assaulting the wife of a U.S. Navy officer …  Soon after, he was killed by her relatives.
Kim Farrant is his niece. But growing up, her family never spoke about her uncle.
At StoryCorps in Honolulu, she told her sister …  Joy Kahahawai-Welch … how she first heard the story.
 
Transcript
KF: I was in a Hawaiian history class in middle school and one of the topics was a very tragic story of a young man who was falsely accused of raping a woman and then the family kidnapped and murdered him. And they were never brought to justice.
This man had the very same name as our dad: Joseph Kahahawai. The teacher then asked me, ‘Is this your family?’ So I came home and I asked mom and she said, ‘Yeah. That is dad’s brother.’
He had just turned 23 years old right before he was killed. And then our dad was born just 11 months later. He inherited the very same name. So Dad was the new Joe… and he became the star of our family. He was like the sun that we all revolved around.
I think he knew that they wanted the name and the legacy to live on.
JK: You know… Dad innately carried himself a certain way to make his brother proud. And I remember wanting to hear more about what happened. But the gist of it was, ‘It’s just too hard to talk about.’
KF: Right. I look back and I think, ‘Oh, is there something to be ashamed of?’ But that first generation needed those years of silence and peace to heal and recover.
And it made us all hold each other more close and more dear … Like we’re this unbroken chain of family. 
JK: We pay our uncle our respects by going to the cemetery, you know? Taking care of it. 
KF: It’s a humble cemetery in the middle of Kalihi. And the plumeria tree above his grave has a lot of flowers. So fresh flowers are raining down on him daily right now. 
JK: ‘Ho’omana’o’ is on his gravestone and that’s a good reminder to never forget. Always remember.

Close