Phil Mortillaro (PM) and Philip Mortillaro Jr. (PMJ)
PM: I was one of those kids who would show up when school first started. And they would see me again around Christmas time. And then they would see me in June to tell me that I had to do the grade over again. So dropping out of school was, it was inevitable. And as far as you doing the business? You started younger than me.
PMJ: As soon as I could walk.
PM: Even before you were walking.
PMJ: Yeah, I…
PM: I’ve got pictures of you in the shop when you were in the basinet.
PMJ: I was literally there since day one. I saw you do it, I was like, ”Ok, I can do this.” Then I kind of realized, man, you know, everyone loves my dad. One half of that is, you know, ‘cause he’s a great guy, but the other half is, like, he’s the guy who helps you when even other locksmiths can’t help.
PM: I have a sense of usefulness. And that’s a big thing in my noodle, you always have to feel like I have some worth.
PMJ: I’m not just saying this, you’re the most hardworking, tenacious person I know and…
PM: That comes from coming from immigrant parents. You can never work hard enough. Even when you’re working seven days a week they say, “You’re a little lazy.” Think about it Philip, when am I ever late?
PMJ: Never.
PM: When do I ever take vacations?
PMJ: No, never.
PM: And when am I gonna retire?
PMJ: One day before your funeral? PM: You know it.
PMJ: Yup. [Laughter]
PM: You know if you ever didn’t want to do this, you know, I would never be heart broken. I would understand.
PMJ: Yeah, yeah.
PM: You know what I mean? My father, he hated my business man. You know, I had a cousin who became an accountant, and my father used to tell me about him all the time. But um, I think it was the, the founder of IBM, he said: ”I’m no genius, but I’m bright in spots, and I stay around those spots.” I like that.
PMJ: You raised all of us, man. Five kids and every single one of them did not ever want for anything, man. That’s hard to do for someone who just went up to the eighth grade.
PM: Well you do your best kid. This is what you do. But honestly your best. Not just your B.S. best. And even if you fail. It doesn’t feel that bad.
PMJ: You’re always my barometer. You never let anyone down. That’s what sets you apart.

CloseRob Rigano (RR): My name is Rob Rigano. 
Phil Rigano (PR): And, uh, what’s your relationship to me?
RR: We’re brothers, unfortunately. Yes [laughs]
Von Diaz:  Rob Rigano lives in New York and his older brother Phil lives near San Diego.
They see each other once a year and on one of those visits in 2006 the StoryCorps airstream trailer was parked near Phil’s home.
He came back to StoryCorps reflect on their conversation.
PR: My brother, Robbie loved coming here, and our family had had an Airstream trailer, so taking Robbie to StoryCorps was a natural fit.  
PR: What’s your earliest memory, Rob? 
RR: I rolled my Uncle Charlie’s Dodge into the street light. 
PR: Wait, what happened?-
RR: Went down the driveway, I jumped out of the car, and it went down the driveway.
PR: Into a telephone pole? 
RR: Yes. [laughs] 
PR: Robbie is what they call developmentally disabled. He knew he had limits, but he had a way of just melting your heart.  
PR: Do you remember, uh, one time in, Mom’s station wagon,
RR: Yeah, I fell out. 
PR: Yeah? And what were you doing, playing with the doors while the car was driving? 
RR: No, the locks were defected. 
PR: So you weren’t playing with the door handle? 
RR: No. I think they had trouble with the locks on that particular model car.
PR: I know you had trouble with the locks  [laughs]
RR: And then another time I bit a horse. 
PR: No, you didn’t Bite a horse, Rob. 
RR: I thought I did? [Laughs]
PR: The story was you wanted to go up and pet the horse and the man said “he can pet it, the horse won’t bite” and mom said “I’m not afraid of the horse biting my son I’m afraid of what my son might do to the horse.” [laughs]
PR: Besides these shenanigans he ended up working at the Department of Public Works for 30 years. Where he got to walk around the streets picking up litter, cleaning, sweeping. And he got to know nearly every resident. He was often referred to as “the real mayor” by the people. In fact he would go around our neighborhood to look in on our older neighbors. And he would say, “well, who else is going to do it?” He just has that sense of what’s right. 
PR: What’s your happiest memory? 
RR: Well uh, my happiest memory is when dad took me to learn how to swim. But my dad’s a little excitable. 
PR: [laughs] Why do you think that is, Rob? 
RR: I think that’s his nature. 
PR: Yeah? Not your nature, maybe, you know, doing things? 
RR: No no, that’s his nature. 
PR: Rolling cars into trees? 
RR: I don’t do that anymore. 
PR: Oh okay [laughs]
PR: I was listening to this recording with my wife, and she said  “Isn’t it great to hear Robbie being Robbie again?” 
Because he came down with COVID more than once, And his illness has really taken a toll on his sense of humor. He is not as effervescent as he used to be. 
We miss those things because he was always a glue that bound the family together. He is a gem of a guy and we all helped polish him.
PR: Anything else Rob?
RR: I think that’s about it. 
PR: That’s all? 
RR: Yeah. And next year we could have stories about you.

CloseHOST:
For 25 years… the Lesbian Switchboard operated in New York City… it was a helpline for women with no one to talk to about being gay… 
And if you called in the 1980s… longtime volunteer Denise Tuite [TOOT] might have answered the phone. 
At StoryCorps… she remembered what this work meant to her.
Denise Tuite (DT): The Lesbian Switchboard was located in an old school building. The room was a tiny room, and there were no windows. It was very depressing looking, to tell you the truth.  It was that old, gray, green color they used to paint schools at that time, so it looked kind of dingy. 
 
But it was our place. You know, it was beautiful. 
 
Typical calls were, I’m coming to New York, what’s the best  bar for lesbians specifically? But then every once in a while you’d get somebody that would call and just want to talk… Someone from Oshkosh, Wisconsin or something. ‘Should I tell my parents? Shouldn’t I tell my parents?’ 
 
The suicidal calls we weren’t permitted to take, ‘cause we weren’t trained for that. I had a few of those calls. ‘Don’t kill yourself, don’t be ashamed of yourself, call this number.’ That’s all we could say, really.
 
But I realized much later on, the switchboard was not only me helping other people, it was me helping me.
 
My family was very close-knit Brooklyn Irish Catholic. Church every Sunday, go to Catholic school… and I started to realize I was gay, when I was about 14. And believe it or not, at one time I was really pretty (laughs), and I had a boyfriend, but I didn’t want to be with him. And my mother? She wanted me at 16 to marry, so I could get these feelings of being a lesbian out of me.
  
She felt I was a bad influence on my younger brother and sisters. So when I graduated high school, my mother didn’t want me in the house anymore. You know, and I was still like just a kid.
 
It would have been a hell of a lot easier for me to get married, and have a family and be accepted by my mother, and loved by my mother…which… is something I wanted. But that wasn’t who I was. 
 
The impact that the switchboard had on me, I realized that a lot of people out there are like me, and now I had to tell them it was okay… there’s nothing wrong with you.
 
That’s what people wanted to hear. They wanted to hear that no matter where they were, no matter how isolated they were, there are other people like you. You know, you had to tell them that they weren’t alone. 

Close