JM: As you’ve heard… StoryCorps has always been about chasing big ideas.
 
MG: And one of those big ideas is that every single person in the country would one day be able to record an interview. 
 
JM: But during our first ten years, if someone wanted to record, they’d have to come to one of our booths in person. In 2015, that all changed…
 
MG: That year, StoryCorps founder Dave Isay went on stage to give a TED Talk.
 
Dave Isay (DI): Tonight, I’m going to try to make the case that inviting a loved one, a friend or even a stranger to record a meaningful interview with you just might turn out to be one of the most important moments in that person’s life, and in yours… [FADE OUT]
 
JM: Dave had won the TED Prize…. And that night he was on stage to reveal a brand new idea. 
 
DI: Here is my wish: that you will help us take everything we’ve learned through StoryCorps and bring it to the world, so that anyone can easily record a meaningful interview with another human being which will then be archived for history.
 
Over the past couple of months, the team at StoryCorps has been working furiously to create an app that will bring StoryCorps out of our booths, so that it can be experienced by anyone, anywhere, anytime. 
 
Together we can create an archive of the wisdom of humanity, and maybe in doing so, we’ll learn to listen a little more and shout a little less. Maybe these conversations will remind us what is really important. And maybe, just maybe, it will help us recognize that simple truth that every life, every single life, matters equally and infinitely. Thank you very much. (Applause) [FADE OUT]
 
<MUSIC> 
 
MG: And just like that, one of the largest barriers to participating in StoryCorps was gone. 
 
Participant:  Grandpa, tell me about your parents…
 
Annie Yang: What was your first impression when you came to America?
 
Participant Can you share one of the happiest memories in your lifetime?
 
Participant Tell me what you were like as a child and how did you like to spend your time…
 
AY: (Question in Lao)
 
Dad: My advice is don’t grow up, it’s a trap!
 
MG: In this episode… stories from beyond the recording booth…  I’m Michael Garofalo.
 
JM: And I’m Jasmyn Morris. From NPR… this is StoryCorps Then and Now… celebrating 20 years of StoryCorps.
 
[MUSIC END]
 
MG: A few months after the app came out, there was a perfect opportunity to get people to use it… Thanksgiving – a holiday known for putting family members in the same room.
 
JM: So that year… we asked people to use the app when they went home for the holidays. We called it the Great Thanksgiving Listen… and it’s actually become a once-a-year tradition.
 
MG: The hope was that we could get enough people to interview each other… that we’d document an entire generation in one day… like we said, big ideas. 
 
Anyway, the interviews started coming in… from people’s kitchens, hotel rooms… and even one from inside a parked car at a strip mall in Iowa…
 
We asked that person who recorded that one  to walk us through that experience…
 
Kara Masteller (KM): Hi my name is Kara Masteller and I interviewed my grandfather in my 1994 Buick.
 
KM: How did you know that grandma was the one?
 
James Kennicott (JK): Well, she was a good looker. (Laughs) We fit together. We were a good pair.
 
KM: My grandma, everyone referred to her as like a spicy meatball. She swore a lot, but she looked so innocent that no one ever expected her to say the things that she said.
 
KM: Were you nervous to propose to her?
 
JK: No. We had something to say, we said it. Like you. (Laughs)
 
KM: What are the keys to a happy marriage?
 
JK: Well if something happens just say, ‘I’m sorry’ and get it over with. There’s no reason to carry on. I just say ‘I’m sorry. I love ya,’ and that was the whole story.
 
KM: (Laughs)
 
KM: I was really surprised by my grandpa saying sorry. I’ve never heard him say sorry.
 
KM: How would you like to be remembered?
 
JK: Remem—? Ha. (laughs)
 
KM: Do you want to be remembered as like a real tough guy? Or…
 
JK: Yeah, I was a pretty soft guy.
 
KM: You intimidated me when I was little.
 
JK: I did? (Laughs)
 
KM: Yeah. You did.
 
KM: Are you happy about the life you’ve lived?
 
JK: Oh yeah. It wasn’t the easiest life back in them days. Mother died when I was four. And it was a tough life.
 
KM: He tells one story about how he was eight or nine and he was ice skating on the river and he fell through. He didn’t have hot water wherever he was living with his dad. So he broke into the school and just took a hot shower in the school. I think that says a lot about his childhood that there was really no one there to help him get out of the water or keep him warm.
 
Last April he was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s, and I had never really heard him say much about it.
 
KM: What do you think about Alzheimer’s?
 
JK: Not much you can do. I even can’t remember some names now myself. (Laughs) So maybe I have got it. I don’t know.
 
KM: And when he said, ‘I don’t know what it would be like to have it.’ That was difficult for me. So then I had to ask a follow-up just out of, I don’t know, self-preservation because I thought I was gonna cry.
 
KM: As people age, do you have any advice for them as they get older?
 
JK: It’s coming.
 
KM: (Laughs)
 
JK: Don’t fight it. Just roll with. I mean real life. Live it. It’s wonderful.
 
KM: (Laughs) Thank you grandpa.
 
KM: After the interview my grandpa and I talked a lot more. The last thing he said 
(laughs) before we got out of the car was, ‘Let’s give ‘em hell kiddo.’
 
<MUSIC>
 
JM: That’s Kara Masteller with her grandfather James Kennicott from her 1994 Buick in an Iowa parking lot…
 
MG: Before this… StoryCorps typically had been recording about 7,000 interviews a year. But with the app… on the Sunday after Thanksgiving… 17,000 interviews were added to the archive. 
 
The app made it possible for people to record even if their hometown wasn’t a stop on the StoryCorps tour… which is important… because some conversations can’t wait. Dave Isay knew that first hand… 
 
DI: Ten years ago, I recorded a StoryCorps interview with my dad. I never thought about that recording until a couple of years ago, when my dad, who seemed to be in perfect health, was diagnosed with cancer. He passed away very suddenly a few days later.
 
I listened to that interview for the first time at three in the morning on the day that he died. I have a couple of young kids at home, and I knew that the only way they were going to get to know this person who was such a towering figure in my life would be through that session. I thought I couldn’t believe in StoryCorps any more deeply than I did, but it was at that moment that I fully and viscerally grasped the importance of making these recordings. Every day, people come up to me and say, ”I wish I had interviewed my father or my grandmother or my brother, but I waited too long.” Now, no one has to wait anymore. 
 
JM: And we saw people using the app in this way, like Eva Vega-Olds… In 2015, her father Leonardo was diagnosed with lung cancer. After going through chemo unsuccessfully… he went into hospice care at his home in New Jersey. And Eva used the app to preserve his voice…
 
Eva Vega-Olds (EVO): When I was recording my dad, I was in his bedroom that he shared with my mom. There was the hospital bed in there, he had an oxygen machine, and he was struggling to breath, but I said, “Dad, do you want to do an interview?” And he said, “Let her rip,” and so we did.
 
EVO: Daddy, where were you born?
 
Leonardo Vega (LV): Puerto Rico.
 
EVO: And do you know how long you’ve been in New Jersey?
 
LV: Sixty-five years. I’ve been here all my life.
 
EVO: He was a factory worker, worked the graveyard shift, you know so he’s leaving for work when we’re coming back from school. And then later on, he was a custodian and he was always working.
 
EVO: How do you want to be remembered?
 
LV: I don’t know…
 
EVO: Well I plan on telling the kids that you were really loyal, a committed father… funny…
 
EVO: My family’s the kind of family that if you can’t take sarcasm, forget about it. Like my wedding day, I remember walking down the aisle, and my dad was walking like super slow. And I’m like, “Dad!” And he says to me, “Shhh, it’s my day. I finally get rid of you.”
 
EVO: Do you remember teaching me how to swim?
 
LV: Mm-hmm…
 
EVO: I remember you throwing me in the water and I was screaming and crying like I was gonna drown. And I was like, “No, I can’t swim!” And then you yelled at me, “Well then just stand up” (laughs.) Do you remember that?
 
LV: Yes.
 
EVO: When we took him home, he came back to hospice care and the nurses were there. He looked at me and he said, “I think they think I’m gonna die.” And I said, “Well, if you feel differently then do differently.” But every day he got weaker and closer to the end.
 
EVO: Do you think you’re dying?
 
LV: Everybody dies.
 
EVO: Up until that moment, we had not talked about him dying.
 
EVO: Are you afraid?
 
LV:  No.
 
EVO: I wish it wasn’t happening right now. What are you most proud of Daddy?
 
LV: My kids.
 
EVO: Your kids?
 
LV: My family.
 
EVO: Okay, let me end it for now…
 
EVO: I did the interview Tuesday afternoon and he passed on Thursday night. You know, not for nothing but my dad’s a working class fellow, he bought a home, paid off his home, and was able to die in his home, with his family around him. For him, that was the pinnacle of what your life should be. And I think that he did achieve his dreams.
 
<MUSIC>
 
MG: Coming up after the break… 
 
Martin Olson (MO): StoryCorps’ whole business model, if you will, is getting two people together in an enclosed space to talk right at each other, which, you know, when there’s a global respiratory pandemic is, you know, not great. 
 
Stay with us…
 
<MUSIC OUT>
 
[Break]
 
<MUSIC>
 
JM: When the entire world came to a halt in March of 2020… so did StoryCorps…
 
MO: We all were kind of like, what the heck do we do? 
 
JM: That’s Martin Olson, the director of digital at StoryCorps – he’s the guy behind the scenes who keeps things like our app and the archive running. And in the early days of Covid… when suddenly no one could sit down together for an interview anymore… he had to kind of figure out how to keep StoryCorps itself running.
 
MO: I remember we were still at the StoryCorps offices and Dave just came by and, sort of, started chatting. He was just like, “Can we do anything remote?” And, you know, obviously looking a little bit panicked. Like, How can we actually do something that helps bring people together in this crazy moment? I had actually been messing around a little bit with remote recording, and, at that point, Zoom had entered people’s lives very quickly. You know, here we come, a non-profit with a two person digital team and we’re like, “Cool, we’re going to build a thing. Trust us, it’ll work.”
 
MG: And just like that…another “big idea” was born… 
 
MO: And I remember over a weekend basically sat down and banged together like a little basic prototype. Two people with browsers can see each other; they can talk to each other. We can record this audio and then we can get that to talk to our archive. 
 
JM: You know, that weekend where you sat down to just be like, I gotta build this thing? I mean, are you hunched over your computer til three in the morning, like, how are you doing this? 
 
MO: Yeah, I guess coffee is an occupational hazard of being both a computer nerd and Swedish–actually my son’s first word was kaffe, which is, uh, coffee in Swedish. So thankfully that kept me going, but honestly it was a little bit sort of piece by piece, right? It’s like, alright well, Okay so I’ve got one window and I can see myself in that one and I can see myself in this one. Great. Check. Okay, so they need to hit a record button. Alright so we’ll add that. Did it work? Crap it didn’t work. Alright, doop, doop, doop…Try a thing. You realize that you forgot a semicolon somewhere because it’s two in the morning. It’s a little bit of just sort of trying your way forward sometimes, until you sort of look up and you’re like oh, I should probably go to bed or I’m gonna be a little groggy tomorrow. 
 
JM: So was all of this exciting for you as, like, a nerdy tech guy? Or was it terrifying? 
 
MO: Yeah, I resent the premise of the question as a nerdy tech guy, but…
 
JM: Hey, I’m using your words. (laughs)
 
MO: As a highly socially competent tech guy.
 
I don’t remember a moment where I kinda walked in and it was like, you know, Shark Tank and I was like, “Dave, here’s my prototype.” I think it was more like, “look I put this thing together; it seems like this is a thing we can do.” Next thing I know it’s got a name called StoryCorps Connect. They’re like, “When can we get this thing done?”  
 
JM: You’ve got 48 hours…
 
MO: Well no…yeah right. It was a lot faster than you’d really wanna do this kind of thing. 
 
But it was not like a single ‘just me’ effort. There was a lot of different people involved. At the time I also worked with another great guy named Steven on our technology team, so a lot of the early interviews are he and I testing internally.  
 
Martin: Yeah, so this is a recording from my phone. And I guess the real question is how is this going to come out on the other side. Will it come out at all? Let’s see what happens.
 
MO: We’ve gotta see if this thing records so I’ve gotta sit there and just record myself I guess. And so there’s a lot of me just like doo doo doo doo doo, you know,  into the thing and like…
 
Martin: Doo doo doo, <whistling, beats playing>
 
MO: Before we released it more widely, we actually have a whole raft of interviews that were staff members calling family members. 
 
JM: And this includes you…
 
MO: Yeah. So I’ve got one with my sister. 
 
MO: So hey, how’s it going?
 
Sara: It’s going alright, how are you?
 
MO: Ah you know, stressing out. Because this thing tomorrow, in theory, this thing is going to go live and I basically built it in two weeks [Laughs]
 
Sara: Are we testing it?
 
MO: Yeah, we’re testing it.
 
JM: After lots of testing and fixing StoryCorps Connect on the fly… we opened it up to the public…and… people started to use it.
 
<MUSIC>
 
JB: When did you realize COVID-19 was serious?
 
Evette Jourdain: My anxiety levels are always on 10. I pray on my way to work, I pray on my lunch break. What keeps me going is the fact that I need to keep goin.
 
Craig Boddie: I fear whenever I leave the house. Everyday I wake up and just wonder, ’Is this the day that COVID-19 is gonna come home with me?’
 
Michelle Dawn-Huston: I’ve lost several people over these last couple months that I wasn’t able to say goodbye to, and so that has been really hard.
 
JK: One of the things I miss most is giving you a hug. And uh, when this is all over it’s, uh, one of the things I wanna do. 
 
MO: I remember we had this feeling like, you know, this is this important moment, not only do we need to be here to, you know, help people connect, but also, you know, to document this moment when all of a sudden people found themselves in this new alien world, right? 
 
<MUSIC OUT>
 
JM: This new world was scary, unknown, and lonely…because the only thing worse than not seeing loved ones… was the possibility of exposing them to the virus…
 
MG: Dr. Roberto Vargas was the Director of Microbiology at a hospital in Rochester, New York. When the pandemic hit he found himself working long hours in the lab… running countless COVID tests.
 
Because of the risk… and for the sake of his wife and four kids… he started living in a hotel near his lab… and then later in the basement of their house.
 
JM: That’s where he was for this StoryCorps Connect recording… with his wife, Susan, and their 10-year-old son, Xavier, directly upstairs from him… but speaking through their computers.
 
Roberto Vargas (RV): When I would go to the hotel room after a long day and it was just me there, and it was very quiet; that was when I missed you all the most.
 
Xavier Vargas (XV): It got very worrying once I knew the virus was going to be, like, a big thing, and with you gone it was way harder. I just missed you.
 
Susan Vargas (SV): I remember you’d dropped groceries off and put them on the front porch, and that’s when we started talking through the window next to our front door. You would talk on your cell phone, and the kids and I would sit behind the window. And I remember one of the hardest nights, I think you were just exhausted, you just had your head on the window and were crying.
 
But eventually, you started sleeping in the basement. And I would not let the kids go past the top of the basement stairs.
 
XV: We had to stay far away but I just felt better that you could be, like, a part of us. 
 
RV: Mm-hmm.
 
XV: It’s still very hard but it’s just nice to see you, Dad.
 
RV: You have been so helpful to mom, so thank you, ok? 
 
XV: Thanks.
 
SV: I remember, once you came into the basement, the best night I had yet, you know, your coworker had made all these different dishes for us. You sat at the bottom of the stairs in a rocking chair, and I was at the top.
 
RV: I remember that, yes. I even remember the food; it smelled so good.
 
SV: It was the first time we had been able to connect in so long and, as crazy as it sounds, it’s the best date I’ve ever had with you in my life. 
 
RV: Without you, I wouldn’t have been able to do what I’ve been able to do at work. You have to be absolutely everything to our four beautiful kids. I’ve never loved you more and I know it hasn’t been easy.
 
XV: Can you guys try not to cry, it makes me sad when you cry.
 
SV, RV: [Laugh]
 
SV: Oh sorry, honey. These are tears of happiness.
 
SV: Roberto, I admire you so much–always admired you–but you’ve done things these 
past couple months that seem impossible.
 
RV: What you’re doing is a lot harder than what I’m doing, a lot harder.
 
XV: Dad, I just want to say thank you for helping get rid of this virus.
 
RV: That’s a team effort and that team includes you. But what carries me through is this family.
 
<MUSIC> 
 
MO: StoryCorps was always really about people talking to each other and looking back, sort of saying, like, where did you grow up? How did you get to this place? During that time though we actually have so much of people just connecting with each other and saying, like, so how has this been for you? How is this currently going? These basic realities of, like, figuring out how to be around each other, how to find toilet paper, you know, which, remember that? 
 
JM: God yeah.
 
MO: That was fun.
 
MG: At this point, it’s been more than half a year that we’ve been living in isolation… and then Thanksgiving comes along… a holiday where we’re all supposed to get together. 
 
JM: So once again, the question was… what do we do?
 
<MUSIC OUT>

MG: There was an older story from before the pandemic…about a vacuum repair guy from Melrose, Massachusetts named Scott MacCaulay… and he hosts Thanksgiving dinner for strangers. We thought maybe he’d have the answer…Here’s his original story from 2010…
 
Scott Macaulay (SM): My folks decided to get divorced. And if you were nice to one, the other one would get mad with you. When October came, I thought, gee, you know, what’s going to happen at Thanksgiving?
 
So I just thought, well, there must be some other people that are in the same boat. Why should they have that rotten feeling? Why should they be stuck home alone? So, I put an ad in the local paper and offered to cook Thanksgiving dinner for twelve people. People came and they had a good time. And, last year 84 people showed up. What I do is transform the hall at the First Baptist Church to look as close to home as I can get it. I have a fake fireplace. I have Norman Rockwell’s famous Thanksgiving picture framed. And the way I test my success or failure is how long they stay.
 
Last year, I had a family show up two hours late. He had lost his job and they had heard about the dinner and wanted something to eat. And, some of these people might not have anything, but they always find something that they can be grateful for. My goal is always to have nobody sign up, ’cause that means everybody’s got a place to go and everybody’s okay. And that’s what keeps me going twenty-five years later.
 
<MUSIC>
 
MG: So in 2020…we reached back out to Scott to see how he was dealing with this new reality.
 
JM: Well, turns out…instead of hosting an in-person event… Scott partnered with a local restaurant to give away free meals from the window of his vacuum repair shop.
 
<MUSIC OUT>
 
MG: Using StoryCorps Connect, Scott spoke with his friend Loretta Saint-Louis, who he met during one of his dinners.
 
Loretta Saint-Louis (LSL): I was new to Melrose and I didn’t really know people here. And I saw the advertisement. I think it was in the paper. And it took a bit of courage for me to just call you.
 
SM: What was your first impression of this crazy guy on the other end of the phone?
 
LSL: You were so friendly. I was blown away, all the care that you put into it. It felt like I was going to a family Thanksgiving event. And I’m going to miss that a lot.
 
SM: Yeah, because of the COVID-19 crisis. I’ve offered people alternatives to us getting together. 
 
LSL: It’s nice to know that you still want to feed us, but it’s the togetherness of it that’s important.
 
SM: You know, all the people that come …they are young and old, male, female from different places, backgrounds, and countries. And what I find always interesting is despite the great differences, they all have similar things that they’re thankful for. And some of them will make you cry. Somebody will say their son’s now speaking to them. You know, no matter what your condition is, health-wise, financial, or newly divorced, or newly widowed, they focus for some time on good things. And I think that’s 
wonderful.
 
LSL: What advice do you have for people who will be alone this year?
 
SM: I would say call everybody and anybody that you can think of tell them, “I love you.” Don’t talk with your mouth full, you know, we don’t want spraying turkey all over the computer screen or the phone. But connect with as many people that you think might be alone or would appreciate a call and tell them you’re thinking of them.
 
My philosophy is: I can’t fix the country or the world or even the town, but I can brighten my own corner. It doesn’t matter what any of the differences that we can divide ourselves with, if your neighbor’s house is burning down, you run to put the fire out. I’m not going to sit around, talk about it. I’m just going to do something about it. And that’s sort of what the Thanksgiving dinner is all about. That would be my hope for America, that everybody would just brighten the corner where they are.
 
<MUSIC> Vittoro by Blue Dot Sessions
 
MG: We checked in with Scott again this year, and he’s still running those takeaway dinners. Last year, he served 100 people.
 
MO: It was just a weird weird time. You know, and… It is so bananas to think back to it now. But I really do think that it generally felt, just, good to do something. And I’m the first person to say that technology is not the solution to a lot of problems. But it is nice when there is something where, like, you can think of a way to do something that just wouldn’t be possible otherwise. And, again, hopefully, if you’ve done your job right, the technology somewhat melts away, and it’s just communication. It’s just people. 
 
JM: And it continues today. 
 
MO: Yeah. It’s still what we use to record, you know, a lot of interviews. And it’s really opened us up to connect people who have something to say to each other but they’re not in the same place. 
 
I always used to joke with people that whenever there’s a zombie apocalypse, right, I’m not going to be much use because a lot of my skills have to do with plugging things together and, like, electronics and computers. But in this case, all these computer nerdy skills actually came in handy when it had to actually wire things together. So you know, that was nice. 
 
MG: That’s all for this week’s episode. It was produced by Max Jungreis and Jud Esty-Kendall. Our Technical Director is Jarrett Floyd. 
 
JM: Artwork for this episode was created by Liz McCarty. Special thanks to Nadia Reiman, Camila Kerwin, Gaspar Caro and Jey Born.  
 
MG: And it’s time again for that StoryCorps tradition… The Great Thanksgiving Listen. Go to thegreatlisten.org to find out how to participate… in person or virtually. 
 
I’m Michael Garofalo.
 
JM: And I’m Jasmyn Morris. Thanks for listening.
 
<MUSIC OUT>

Close<MUSIC>
 
JM: Over the last year, Mary Johnson-Roy has been getting a steady stream of visitors… all there to basically say one thing…
 
CONNIE: Thank you, Mary. I love you.
 
ANN: I thank you so much just for being in my life. I love you, sister Mary.
 
PRINCESS: Thank you Mary Johnson-Roy.
 
MG: Mary lives in Minneapolis. And has spent many years supporting mothers who have lost children to homicide.
 
CONNIE: If it wasn’t for Mary, I don’t know where I would be as a grieving mother. Well, I know that I wouldn’t be here. 
 
MG: Mary’s dedicated to this work because in 1993, she lost her own son, Laramiun Byrd. 
 
JM: But there’s something else about Mary that makes her uniquely qualified to do this work…
 
Her connection to the man who killed her son…
 
Mary: My name is Mary Johnson. 
 
Oshea: I am Oshea Israel. My relationship to Mary Johnson is: I’m her second son.
 
<MUSIC>
 
JM: From NPR, this is StoryCorps Then and Now… celebrating 20 years of StoryCorps. I’m Jasmyn Morris…
 
MG: And I’m Michael Garofalo. This week… a story you have to hear to believe.
 
<MUSIC>
 
JM: Let’s start at the beginning… in the 80s, when Mary Johnson-Roy was a single mother raising her only child in Minneapolis…
 
MJR: My son, Laramiun, was intelligent. Sixth grade he was at a twelfth grade reading level. He went to a private school, so he was the little preppy. He grew up in church, so he always had a suit on on Sundays.
 
JM: Fast forward to 1993…when Laramiun was 20…
 
MJR: He was blessed with the brains to do something differently, but that’s the lifestyle that he chose: selling drugs, you know, fast money.
 
MG: One night, he went to a party, where he crossed paths with Oshea Israel, who was 16 at the time. They got into a fight… and Oshea shot and killed him. 
 
JM: Oshea was convicted of murder and sent to prison.
 
And over the years, Mary struggled to make sense of what happened to her son. And after a decade of trying to find peace… she decided to try something different… to visit Oshea in prison.
 
Regina Irwin (RI): I’m telling you, what took place that day was amazing.
 
MG: That’s Regina Irwin, one of Mary’s closest friends who went with her to the prison that day…
 
RI: As Mary was walking up to go to the prison, she stopped and she looked at me, and she said, “Regina, I can’t do it.” And Mary was bending down almost like she was in labor. And as we got inside, she eventually told the woman that was gonna take us in to meet Oshea, that she had to go to the restroom. And when she came out, she had prayed… and she was ready to go in. 
 
As we were sitting at the table to meet Oshea, they had left a pitcher of water but they didn’t leave a glass for the man that had taken her son’s life. And Mary said “I will not sit here and not allow him to have a glass that he can drink water from just like everyone else here.” And the guards brought in a glass for him to drink. 
 
MG: We’ll let Mary and Oshea tell you what happened next. This is from a conversation they had in 2011… shortly after Oshea finished serving his sentence.
 
Mary Johnson (MJ): You and I met at Stillwater Prison. I wanted to know if you were in the same mindset of what I remembered from court, where I wanted to go over and hurt you. But you were not that 16-year-old. You were a grown man. I shared with you about my son.
 
Oshea Israel (OI): And he became human to me. You know, when I met you it was like, ok, this guy is real. And then, when it was time to go, you broke down and started shedding tears and the initial thing to do was just try and hold you up as best I can– just hug you like I would my own mother, you know.
 
MJ: After you left the room, I began to say: ”I just hugged the man that murdered my son.”  And I instantly knew that all that anger and the animosity, all the stuff I had in my heart for 12 years for you– I knew it was over, that I had totally forgiven you. 
 
OI: As far as receiving forgiveness from you– sometimes I still don’t know how to take it because I haven’t totally forgiven myself yet. It’s something that I’m learning from you – I won’t say that I have learned yet– because it’s still a process that I’m going through.
 
MJ: I treat you as I would treat my son. And our relationship is beyond belief. We live next door to one another.
 
OI: Yeah. So you can see what I’m doing– you know first hand. 
 
MJ: Uh-huh…
 
OI: We actually bump into each other all the time leaving in and out of the house. And, you know, our conversations, they come from ”Boy, how come you ain’t called over here to check on me in a couple of days? You ain’t even asked me if I need my garbage to go out!”
 
MJ: Uh-huh.
 
OI: I find those things funny because it’s a relationship with a mother for real. 
 
MJ: Well, my natural son is no longer here. I didn’t see him graduate. Now you’re going to college. I’ll have the opportunity to see you graduate. I didn’t see him getting married. Hopefully one day, I’ll be able to experience that with you. 
 
OI: Just to hear you say those things and to be in my life in the manner that which you are is my motivation. It motivates me to make sure that I stay on the right path. You still believe in me and the fact that you can do it despite how much pain I caused you– it’s amazing. 
 
MJ: I know it’s not an easy thing, you know, to be able to share our story together. Even with us sitting here looking at each other right now, I know it’s not an easy thing. So I admire that you can do this.
 
OI: I love you, lady.
 
MJ: I love you too, son.
 
<MUSIC> 
 
MG: After that interview aired on NPR… Mary and Oshea continued sharing their story far beyond Minneapolis.
 
JM: They hit the road… visiting churches, synagogues, and prisons…=
 
OI: We were invited to a lot of different places. We’ve had a lot of moments, us walking through the airports together, trying to figure out where we’re going. And as we share our story, we still get to hear each other’s parts which brings us even more closer. And it seemed like the mission kind of took off, even to the point where it grew its own legs and started running.
 
MG: They were on every national media outlet you can think of and international too.
 
She spoke at conferences around the world on love and forgiveness and met with world leaders. President Barack Obama even thanked her for her service.
 
JM: That’s all because of how Mary has helped other families who have lost children to homicide. 
 
She started an organization in 2005 called From Death to Life… that provides healing groups for mothers on both sides of a tragedy, and encourages forgiveness when mothers are ready.
 
MG: And through her work… she met the love of her life… a man named Ed Roy. 
 
Ed Roy (ER): When my first-born and my one and only son was murdered, my daughters had asked me to go to the church to hear you speak. I wasn’t ready for the forgiveness part, but I was at a loss. Like I shared with you, I thought God took my boy and was punishing me for my own crimes. I had joined the gangs early and pulled my first armed robbery at 11 years old. But with you being there, I saw hope. You took me under your wing; that’s why I called you my angel.
 
Then I remember, I had that dream — that was just before our wedding. And your son was saying, ”Yeah, Mom! Alright!” You know, ”Right on!” And my son was saying, ”Yeah, Dad. ‘Bout time you got it right!” [Laughs]
 
MJR: [Laughs]
 
ER: As the years and time goes by, you know where I’ve been. You know where I hurt.
 
MJR: And I know you take care of me when I’m not doing well. The anniversary is coming up of my son’s murder and I’m grateful to have someone there that has experienced the same thing that I have. 
 
ER: That empty hole is always going to be there in our hearts. But I feel like when we together and we able to listen to one another’s heartbeats, it says a lot.
 
MJR: I’m thankful; I really am. You’re a good man.
 
<MUSIC>
 
MG: They recorded that interview in 2017. But recently, Ed has had to care for Mary in an entirely different way.
 
Stay with us…
 
BREAK
 
JM: 10 years after we first met Mary… she was diagnosed with Lewy Body Dementia… sometimes described as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s all rolled into one.
 
MG: And her husband, Ed, has been her main caretaker.
 
Just a few months ago… the two of them sat down for another interview.
 
ER: There was a lot of things that neither one of us didn’t understand. It was things like leaving something on the stove, parking your car a few houses down the street. And as it progressed, we started understanding together what we was up against. Like, when you started seeing things — the invisible people. And we talked about it, honey. You know, we made humor out of them. We call them the little people [Laughs]. 
 
MJR: [Laughs]
 
ER: Like when you had several bowls of cereal out and you was feeding them. And I said, “You giving all my Cap’n Crunch to the little people. What about me?” [Laughs] And you started laughing, you know. We have so many moments.
 
MJR: Yeah, I need to write them down. 
 
ER: They are written down. They are written down in our hearts, honey.
 
Sometimes I think about when people say that a mind is a terrible thing to waste. 
 
MJR: …to waste. yeah.
 
ER: But you know what? The heart is the terrible thing to waste. 
 
You know, don’t think about just the memory things; we’re here to remember for each other. Don’t worry about the reading because I’m here and read to you. 
 
MJR: How many men would do the things that you do as far as taking care of me? Like putting on my shoes today.
 
ER: That’s what it’s all about.
 
MJR: Yeah.
 
ER: You know, it’s about us taking care of one another. You’ve given me, Mary, a reason for living. I always told you that, though.
 
MJR: Uh-huh.
 
ER: So that’s what I see you doing and giving to other people is hope. You have to have some kind of hope to hold on to. When you don’t have that, you don’t have nothing. 
 
So, it’s true. It’s true what they say about when, uh, when they say wait on God, that he’ll send you that person. You know, he knew what was in my heart.
 
MJR: Wow. I love you.
 
ER: I love you.
 
<MUSIC>
JM: When word of Mary’s illness started to circulate among the families she’s helped… that’s when the visits we told you about earlier began…
 
BRIAN: You’ve got a full slate of visitors for today. 
 
MARY: Why are you saying somebody wants to come and sit and talk to me?
 
BRIAN: Oh Mary, the world would be lined up if they were invited.
 
MG: That’s Brian Mogren. One of Mary’s close friends and the Director of the St. Jane House, where Mary’s healing groups have been meeting for more than 15 years.
 
JM: He started hosting “Thursdays with Mary” … so family and friends… including those Mary has helped… can now help her remember her impact. And at Mary’s request… Brian’s been recording these conversations.
 
GWEN: When I saw Brian’s note about meeting with you on Thursdays, I’m like, Oh, let me get my name on that list. Cause I want to see my friend.
 
MARY: Yeah. I’m so glad that you did. 
 
JM: That’s Mary’s longtime friend Gwen Chandler.
 
GWEN: Baby, you will never have any idea how much you’ve influenced people’s lives. And people will be saying your name for generations and generations. 
 
MICHELE: I met someone recently, her brother was murdered when she was younger, and she wants to meet the person who killed her brother. 
 
MG: Michele Braley is a social worker who was also with Mary at the prison the day that Mary met Oshea… And they’ve been friends ever since…
 
And she said, partly, she had the courage to do that because she knew of your story and that you met Oshea. She’s never met you but you gave her courage. You know, we don’t know all the lives we impact, do we? You know, but I wanted to get a chance to tell you that, Mary.
 
JM: And despite her illness…Mary’s still been helping to run her healing group for mothers every other Saturday…
 
<MUSIC>
 
CONSTANCE: My name is Constance Styles and my son Dante Gray was murdered in 1994. 
 
EBONY: Well I’m Ebony Robinson. My son’s name is Andre Riley Jr and I lost him July 3rd, 2016.
 
CONNIE: My son was murdered in 2016, December 25th. 
 
ANGEL: My name is Angel Cradle. The loss of my son Dewayne Tyson Sr. happened in 2007 and the loss of my grandson Dewayne Tyson Jr. happened in 2018.
 
ANN: My name is Ann and my son, Maurice Wilson, was killed October the sixth, 1997. 
 
PRINCESS: My name is Princess Titus and my son, Anthony Titus, was hit by a bullet intended for another child two weeks after his 16th birthday, right before the fireworks on July 4th, 2010.
 
JM: Some of the mothers who were there this particular day… turned the tables on Mary…
 
PRINCESS: Do you mind if we spend some time sharing with you, Mother Mary, what you mean to us?
 
MARY: Ok. Amen
 
PRINCESS: All right. Amen. 
 
I remember calling Mary around Mother’s Day. She said, this is just how it gets around Mother’s Day and holidays are gonna be like that. So to have a woman who did walk that walk to let me know that I was not crazy and that we were not alone. Loneliness doesn’t help grief and Mary did not allow us to be lonely. 
 
EBONY: So we’re forever grateful to you, Ms. Mary. It’s not a happy situation, but we are blessed to be able to have you as our shepherd.
 
ANN: Ooh, sister Mary, you mean the world to me. I admire you so much. No matter how hard things have been for you lately, you are still here teaching us and showing us what true love is. 
 
PRINCESS: I think we all in tears around the table now. So Mary, thank you for modeling… shining your little light everywhere you go. Thank you Mary Johnson-Roy.
 
MARY: Love you, ladies. 
 
MOTHERS: We love you. 
 
MARY: Appreciate you so much, you don’t know.
 
MG: But for all that’s happened over the past year… there was one person who hadn’t had this kind of conversation with Mary yet… Oshea.
 
JM: Her illness has affected him too. It’s hard to see this woman who has meant so much to him declining. She’s not able to travel anymore or share their story together, which was such a big part of his life. It gave him purpose. So as much as she still means to him, he’s been hesitant to talk with her directly about her health.
 
But finally, this summer, Oshea decided to sit down with Mary again… and StoryCorps was there to record it.
 
OI: Well Mary, it’s been 12 years since we sat down for our first StoryCorps interview and it’s more emotional for me this time. You know, with everything that we’ve been through and we’ve dealt with and everything that’s going on now. You know, it hurts to see. I’m used to the lady that fusses at me all the time. (Laughs) But you’re strong and you’re going to fight for whatever you believe in. And I still see you fighting.
 
MJR: I’m glad to see you. I’m glad to see how you’re doing. So I thank God for that chance today.
 
OI: A lot has changed. I, myself, have two children: my son, he’s three. And a little girl.
 
MJR: She’s how old now?
 
OI: She’s six years old now. I remember when she was born you helped me get the car seat for her. But since we were living next door to each other, you left me for another fella. His name is Ed [Laughs]. 
 
MJR: [Laughs]
 
OI: I remember when I first got wind of you and Ed going out on dates. I’m like, wait, what’s going on? You was mine. [Laughs] But you all blessed me with the opportunity to not only be present in the wedding but to walk you down the aisle, that was, like, again, your words: beyond belief. 
 
MJR: Yeah. I’m proud of you. I’ve been proud for a while.  
 
OI: It has been an amazing journey. From a hug to you becoming a grandmother through me with my kids, to you just being a beacon of light to a lot of people. On our last interview we ended it with me saying “I love you, lady.” And I still feel the same way.
 
<MUSIC>
 
JM: Mary’s still living at home with Ed… and goes to a daytime memory care center three times a week. Brian has set up a GoFundMe to help support them.
 
But one thing is clear… even as Mary’s memory dims… her light does not.
 
MJR: This little light of mine, I’m gonna let it shine, yeah. This little light of mine… Yeah, I’m gonna let it shine. Let it shine, let it shine. Let it shine. Everywhere I go. 
 
Mothers: Everywhere I go… 
 
MJR: I’m gonna let it shine… 
 
Mothers: I’m gonna let it shine… 
 
MJR: Yes…
 
Mothers: Everywhere I go, I’m gonna let it shine. 
 
MJR: Everywhere…
 
Mothers: Everywhere I go… 
 
ALL: I’m gonna let it shine… Let it shine. Let it shine. Let it shine. 
 
MJR: Yeah, Jesus gave it to me, yeah he did. 
 
ALL: I’m gonna let it shine. Yeah Jesus gave it to me, I’m gonna let it shine. Jesus gave it to me, and I’m gonna let it shine.  Let it shine. Let it shine. Let it shine.
 
<MUSIC>
 
MG: This episode was produced by Jasmyn Morris and Jud Esty-Kendall. Our Technical Director is Jarrett Floyd. 
 
JM: Max Jungreis is our Associate Producer. Special thanks to Ian Gonzalez, Gaspar Caro, Liyna Anwar, Roselyn Almonte and especially…Brian Mogren. Without him..none of these recordings would have been possible.
 
MG: Artwork for this episode was created by Liz McCarty, you can see it on our website. There, you can learn more about recording your own interview.
 
I’m Michael Garofalo.
 
JM: And I’m Jasmyn Morris. 
 
Join us again next week for our final episode… as we wrap up this special series…
 
As always, thanks for listening.
 
<MUSIC OUT>

CloseRob Rigano (RR): My name is Rob Rigano. 
Phil Rigano (PR): And, uh, what’s your relationship to me?
RR: We’re brothers, unfortunately. Yes [laughs]
Von Diaz:  Rob Rigano lives in New York and his older brother Phil lives near San Diego.
They see each other once a year and on one of those visits in 2006 the StoryCorps airstream trailer was parked near Phil’s home.
He came back to StoryCorps reflect on their conversation.
PR: My brother, Robbie loved coming here, and our family had had an Airstream trailer, so taking Robbie to StoryCorps was a natural fit.  
PR: What’s your earliest memory, Rob? 
RR: I rolled my Uncle Charlie’s Dodge into the street light. 
PR: Wait, what happened?-
RR: Went down the driveway, I jumped out of the car, and it went down the driveway.
PR: Into a telephone pole? 
RR: Yes. [laughs] 
PR: Robbie is what they call developmentally disabled. He knew he had limits, but he had a way of just melting your heart.  
PR: Do you remember, uh, one time in, Mom’s station wagon,
RR: Yeah, I fell out. 
PR: Yeah? And what were you doing, playing with the doors while the car was driving? 
RR: No, the locks were defected. 
PR: So you weren’t playing with the door handle? 
RR: No. I think they had trouble with the locks on that particular model car.
PR: I know you had trouble with the locks  [laughs]
RR: And then another time I bit a horse. 
PR: No, you didn’t Bite a horse, Rob. 
RR: I thought I did? [Laughs]
PR: The story was you wanted to go up and pet the horse and the man said “he can pet it, the horse won’t bite” and mom said “I’m not afraid of the horse biting my son I’m afraid of what my son might do to the horse.” [laughs]
PR: Besides these shenanigans he ended up working at the Department of Public Works for 30 years. Where he got to walk around the streets picking up litter, cleaning, sweeping. And he got to know nearly every resident. He was often referred to as “the real mayor” by the people. In fact he would go around our neighborhood to look in on our older neighbors. And he would say, “well, who else is going to do it?” He just has that sense of what’s right. 
PR: What’s your happiest memory? 
RR: Well uh, my happiest memory is when dad took me to learn how to swim. But my dad’s a little excitable. 
PR: [laughs] Why do you think that is, Rob? 
RR: I think that’s his nature. 
PR: Yeah? Not your nature, maybe, you know, doing things? 
RR: No no, that’s his nature. 
PR: Rolling cars into trees? 
RR: I don’t do that anymore. 
PR: Oh okay [laughs]
PR: I was listening to this recording with my wife, and she said  “Isn’t it great to hear Robbie being Robbie again?” 
Because he came down with COVID more than once, And his illness has really taken a toll on his sense of humor. He is not as effervescent as he used to be. 
We miss those things because he was always a glue that bound the family together. He is a gem of a guy and we all helped polish him.
PR: Anything else Rob?
RR: I think that’s about it. 
PR: That’s all? 
RR: Yeah. And next year we could have stories about you.

Close