HOST: Recording booths are places for people to look back on their lives… and sometimes… to look ahead… to a time when they’re no longer here…
That’s the direction that this conversation took…
Conchetta Brown has Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, or C-O-P-D, and uses oxygen…
She came to StoryCorps in San Antonio with her daughter, Nidera. 
Transcript TRT: [2:14]
Nidera Brown (NB) and Conchetta Brown (CB)
NB:  If this was to be your very last conversation, is there anything you want to say to me? 
CB: I love you and I’m sorry I have to die but I have to go, girl. It was good while it lasted, but I must go. 
NB: You act like it’s the ending of a relationship [Laughs].  
CB: It is! 
NB: Well, yeah, I guess it is… but–
CB: Because no more mother and daughter. It’s just daughter, mother gone.
NB: Yeah. But you won’t have to worry about oxygen. 
CB: I know that’s the truth. No more medicine. Oh, to think–
NB: No. You just have to slow down. 
CB: Yeah, I try to do that. And then I forget what I’m doing. 
NB: Well, don’t slow down that much. 
CB: Oh… Well, what about you? What would you do?  
NB: If this was my last conversation?
CB: Yes. 
NB: Yeah, I would tell you the same thing, that I love you. 
CB: Do you want to be cremated?
NB: Yes. 
CB: Oh yeah. And where you want us to throw you? In the toilet, the garbage can? 
NB: No, not the garbage can. All that, it didn’t make no sense to get me cremated [Laughs]. 
CB: Okay, so sorry. 
NB: Just get me cremated and throw me out back?
CB: Yeah [Laughs]. We could use some soil and, you know, plant a tree.
NB: Oh yeah… That would be awesome. 
CB: Uuuhuu.
NB: Something that can give fruit, you know. 
CB: That can give back. 
NB: Yes, give it back. So for your great great grandchild listening to this years from now, is there any wisdom you want to pass on to them?
CB: You know, you don’t have to be religious to believe in something, ‘cause religion is what you do every day. And they got a song that say, ‘You don’t miss your water ‘til your well run dry.’ That’s why you’re supposed to treat people kind while they’re alive. 
NB: Yeah.
CB: And when your well dry, you want to see that person again. But it’s all over. 
NB: Yup.
CB: You know, we made do girl… Eventually, I’ve gotta go. And I know it’s gonna break your heart. I’ll be sad that I’m gone ‘cause I won’t have you to talk to. 
But it’s gonna be alright. I’mma always be with you, here.

Close