Von Diaz: And now – a love letter to a family, recorded during a father’s final days. 
Sohaib Sultan was a Muslim Chaplain at Princeton University. And in 2020, he was diagnosed with terminal cancer.
He wanted to record with his wife Arshe to leave something behind for their 3 year old daughter Radiyya, who they adopted from Pakistan.
Sohaib Sultan (SS) and Arshe Ahmed (AA)
SS: You and I would stay up till 12 o’clock at night, waiting to make that phone call to Pakistan, reminding them that we were inquiring about a child. And they would always say, ‘There’s no child for you.’ You know, I’ve wanted to be a father since I was a little kid. And I think hearing those words night after night, it was sad.
But, the moment they said, ‘We have a baby for you,’ I just remember this feeling of joy. 
AA: Yeah. Seeing her for the first time and holding her was just the most gorgeous moment of my life.
So, do you remember the day when you got your full diagnosis?
SS: They called and they said, ‘You probably have a year to live.’ But It didn’t feel like all bad news. 
AA: Hmm.
SS: Like, think about the 40 years that God has given me. What a beautiful life. What a purposeful life. What a blessed life.
But, Radiyya is always asking, ‘Are you better now?’ You know, I say, ‘Abba is not going to get better.’ And when she says, ‘But then I’ll cry and I’ll cry.’ I remember saying to her, ‘Aap insaan ho. Ronaa theek hay.’ You’re a human being, so it’s okay to cry, to be sad.
And you’ve told me that one of the hardest things you imagine is explaining to her where I am. 
AA: Yeah, When she wakes up in the morning and she looks over to our bed and says, ‘Where’s Abba?’ And you’re in the bathroom. I can’t but think about that moment when I’m going to have to answer that differently. That’s going to be a hard one for me. 
SS: You know, I feel a lot of sorrow in my heart thinking about that moment. 
AA: Yeah.
SS: But, even though I won’t be there physically, just know that I’ll be there spiritually. You won’t be alone.
So many people have said, ‘We’re praying for a miracle.’ But I always chuckle at that because I feel like my entire life has been a miracle. And one of them is finding you. 
What you’ve done for me, waking up in the middle of the night, almost every night for the past three months, because I’m in pain. Those are the things that I hope Radiyya really knows, that that’s how you took care of me.
AA: Yeah. You know I’m just grateful for each moment that we get.
SS: My hope is that Radiyya will live life beautifully, no matter how long God gives her. And you are especially going to teach her what it means to take life as a gift and to live it out every day.

CloseRoger Mayo (RM): Portland was nothing like it is now. Portland was a run down, dirty, old sea village. It was dangerous to be gay, and people got beat up all the time. And the store was 11 by 22 feet. Once we opened, we realized we were never gonna make a dime. 
Jim Neal (JN): I knew when somebody was in the store for the first time, and they were a gay man or a lesbian. And this sense of comfort and relief, it was almost like a big sigh. 
I have a good friend that I’m still in touch with today. Her husband was a closeted gay man.
And she thought, I’ve got to bring Bill into Drop Me A Line so that he can meet a couple of gay men… And once he met us, he then decided that he could live his life as a gay man. 
RM: One day I was working at the counter, and this young man came in, and he says,  ‘Do you have a stamp? I’ve got this card and it’s a coming out letter to my mom and I want to get it in the mail.’
And I said, ‘Oh yeah, I have a stamp for that.’ I said, ‘give it to me.’ And he gave it to me and I put the stamp on it and I put it under the counter. And he said, ‘Are you going to give that back to me?’ and I said, ‘No, I said, I’m going to drop it in the mailbox to make sure it gets mailed. You’re not getting it back, your mother’s getting it.  
JN: You know, it’s hands down the most meaningful thing that I’ve done with my life. 
RM:  You know, A lot of my self-confidence came from that store. 
JN: Well, we grew up together! You know, we met when we were young adults– 
RM: You had hair then. 
JN: Never as thick as yours. 
[both laugh]
RM: But, eventually Borders came to the mall, and they had a gay and lesbian book department.
JN: Yeah. The role we served had kind of run its course. You could be visible.
RM: Right. The need moved on. Lately, believe it or not, I’ve actually fantasized about opening another Drop Me A Line.
JN: [Laughing] 
RM: Probably a week after I think about it, I slap myself really hard and think, what are you thinking about? 
JN: Yeah, it’s a great fantasy. 
RM: You do not want to do that.

CloseQaiyaan Harcharek (QH) and Don Rearden (DR)
QH: It seemed as if we knew each other our whole lives, it’s kind of strange.
DR: Yeah, right away. I don’t think the average person can understand what it’s like to grow up in a place where you lose so many people to suicide.
QH: It’s tough.
DR: Yeah, it is. The first person that I knew intimately, who took his own life, was a teammate of mine. I was just a freshman in high school. And he had moved into Bethel to play basketball. We were good friends. 
And then that summer I found out he, you know, took his life. And then, that fall, I lost another classmate. Pretty soon it was like a whole gym full of people… that I knew personally who are gone.
QH: I could relate. 100 percent. All of my adult life, I’ve had struggles with mental health and depression, and I’m a suicide survivor… I attempted it.
However, I have this vision, I don’t – it’s hard to describe, but it was… my wife and children reaching up to me. And there were many, many silhouettes around them of people, with faces, and yours was one of them. 
DR: [chuckles]
QH: What I do know is… it was the love that I received from each and every one of those people that saved my life.

Close