Annie Russell: Miranda Duschack and Mimo Davis’ have been farming together since 2012, supplying flowers in the St. Louis area.
At StoryCorps Miranda and Mimo told their own love story as the first lesbian couple married in Missouri. 
Miranda Duschack (MD) and Mimo Davis (MIM) 
MD: We met at work.
MIM: Right.
MD: At our day job. And then we decided to farm together…fell in love, got married, at a spiritual ceremony where we jumped the broom because we couldn’t legally be married. 
And then the second wedding was in 2014 to be legally married.
MIM: Right.
MD: Do you remember this? When we had August.  Do you remember how I pushed August out, ok…
MIM: What do you mean, do I remember that?
MD: Yeah. But they didn’t know how to fill out the birth certificate.
MIM: I do remember that.
MD: So, I was making a fact sheet to leave at the nurse’s station about how to register. Um…
MIM: It’s okay. It’s okay. You can have you some tears.
MD: I just felt like we were total freaks, man.
MIM: We weren’t freaks, we were just firsts.
MD: We were just first. And it was really embarrassing for me that we fought so hard to get married and then we got divorced. 
MIM: But, you know, that was part of the rights that we fought for.
MD: I know. I mean, I would say that to people, You know, it…
MIM: And that’s all part of the package, right? You get to be married and then you get to be divorced. I mean…
MD: Right. I was like, just like straight people. 
MIM:: Just like straight people [laughs] Right. 
MD: I can get divorced. I can get divorced. It didn’t necessarily pan out the way we thought it would be…
MIM: But we’re still in it. We’re still farming partners.
MD: We’re raising a beautiful son. These are gorgeous flowers sitting in front of us. And Mimo Davis, I’m going to say right now, I still really love you and care about you.
MIM: Of course, of course, I love you and care about you too. I mean that was never in question for me. We are both really, in our hearts and souls and deep down, totally committed to each other, and that’s why we work through all the real stuff. And I see that as a win.

CloseHOST:
On March 1st, 1954, Rafael Cancel Miranda and 3 other Puerto Rican Nationalists opened fire in the House of Representatives calling for the island’s independence.
Several congressmen were injured and Cancel Miranda served 25 years in prison until President Carter commuted his sentence in 1979.
At StoryCorps, his wife, María de los Ángeles Vázquez and their son, Rafael Cancel Vázquez remembered him.
María de los Ángeles Vázquez (MAV) and Rafael Cancel Vázquez (RCV)
MAV: It was presented to the public that the people that took part in that act were crazy. Rafael was sent to Alcatraz, and they were forgotten.
RCV:  So, how did you meet papá, and how did you fall in love?
MAV: [laughs] Well, it wasn’t until the 70s, that people started talking about these four Puerto Ricans that were imprisoned in the States. They had been in jail already for about 20 years. And there was this big campaign to send a Christmas card to Nationalists. So I sent him a picture of an orchid.
And he wrote back, to my surprise, telling me how thankful he was because he had forgotten that flower pots existed. You know, I thought ‘Gosh this man has been in jail for so many years and he is still moved by a flower pot.’
RCV: When I was growing up there was always orchids at our house.
MAV: Uh huh.
RCV: But I just thought that you loved orchids. I didn’t know that it was very special for him too. 
MAV: Sí.
RCV: You know, when I was a little kid, I had no clue about what Dad did. I just knew that whenever we went somewhere, everybody wanted an autograph, a picture or like, ‘Oh, Don Rafa, it’s an honor to meet you.’ And I was like, ‘Wow, my dad is so cool. He’s cooler than yours.’ [laughs]
MAV: After you learned about March 1st, ‘54, did that change your relationship with your father? 
RCV: Of course, some of the things when I was a little kid then made more sense. He would always be in state of alert. For example, when he would take me to eat, I would always notice that he would sit in a way that he could look at the exit. 
And he would say, ‘Hijo, siempre mira pa todos lados,’ like, ‘Always look everywhere.’
But, he was always so loving and gentle and kind, so I remember asking, like, ‘Dad. How on Earth did you grab a gun and started shooting people?’ And he told me about when he was a little kid…
His mom and dad went out to a march, and one of the police chiefs was like, ‘Shoot to kill.’ So his mom and dad went to a protest dressed in white, and they came back dressed in red, because they had to drag themselves over dead bodies.
That was his first memory.
MAV: How do you think your father would like to be remembered?  
RCV: For me, papá, he was my best friend. But I think he would like to be remembered como un puertorriqueño de los pies a la cabeza. 
MAV: Uh huh.
RCV: As a true Puerto Rican from head to toe, and able to look at himself in the mirror every day and feel respect. 
I think that’s how he would love to be remembered.

CloseRoger Mayo (RM): Portland was nothing like it is now. Portland was a run down, dirty, old sea village. It was dangerous to be gay, and people got beat up all the time. And the store was 11 by 22 feet. Once we opened, we realized we were never gonna make a dime. 
Jim Neal (JN): I knew when somebody was in the store for the first time, and they were a gay man or a lesbian. And this sense of comfort and relief, it was almost like a big sigh. 
I have a good friend that I’m still in touch with today. Her husband was a closeted gay man.
And she thought, I’ve got to bring Bill into Drop Me A Line so that he can meet a couple of gay men… And once he met us, he then decided that he could live his life as a gay man. 
RM: One day I was working at the counter, and this young man came in, and he says,  ‘Do you have a stamp? I’ve got this card and it’s a coming out letter to my mom and I want to get it in the mail.’
And I said, ‘Oh yeah, I have a stamp for that.’ I said, ‘give it to me.’ And he gave it to me and I put the stamp on it and I put it under the counter. And he said, ‘Are you going to give that back to me?’ and I said, ‘No, I said, I’m going to drop it in the mailbox to make sure it gets mailed. You’re not getting it back, your mother’s getting it.  
JN: You know, it’s hands down the most meaningful thing that I’ve done with my life. 
RM:  You know, A lot of my self-confidence came from that store. 
JN: Well, we grew up together! You know, we met when we were young adults– 
RM: You had hair then. 
JN: Never as thick as yours. 
[both laugh]
RM: But, eventually Borders came to the mall, and they had a gay and lesbian book department.
JN: Yeah. The role we served had kind of run its course. You could be visible.
RM: Right. The need moved on. Lately, believe it or not, I’ve actually fantasized about opening another Drop Me A Line.
JN: [Laughing] 
RM: Probably a week after I think about it, I slap myself really hard and think, what are you thinking about? 
JN: Yeah, it’s a great fantasy. 
RM: You do not want to do that.

Close