HOST: Jackie Miller and her son Scott first came to StoryCorps in 2008… when Jackie revealed a secret…
Jackie Miller (JM) and Scott Miller (SM)
TRT: [0:40]
JM: When I was seventeen, I got pregnant. And I gave this baby up for adoption and said at that time that I will adopt a child when I’m able to take care of a child.
SM: Wow. I just wasn’t ready for that.
JM: I’m sure.
SM: I worry that you’ll never know how scary it is for me sometimes to imagine life without you.
JM: That’s something I can’t make better for you. And I don’t doubt it’ll be tough but… you’ll be okay…
[MUSIC]
HOST: They came back in 2023. At 88, Jackie’s health was declining… Realizing his mom was nearing the end of life… Scott wanted to do one more interview… 
Transcript TRT: [2:11]
Jackie Miller (JM) and Scott Miller (SM)
SM: I cannot believe 15 years have passed. 
JM: I don’t have any more revelations to unleash on you. 
SM: [laughs]
JM: And now I have an old person’s voice. It cracks…
But I still don’t think of myself as old.
I mean, when I find myself — oh gosh — flirting I realize a guy would have to be nuts to flirt back. But that doesn’t keep me from doing it. The last time, the guy was giving me my flu shot. He was gorgeous, absolutely gorgeous.
SM: [laughs]
JM: But my world is really getting smaller. Words don’t come that easily to me now.
It’s really scary. The other day, I couldn’t remember my cell phone number. I recognize this is part of getting not older but old, you know?
SM: Yeah… You know in our first interview I had said, uh… it scares me imagining life without you, and it doesn’t so much scare me anymore. But, it makes me uneasy imagining a world without you in it. You know, when your parents are both gone, you’re kind of nobody’s son.
So when I think about what I’m going to be holding onto when you’re gone… 
It feels so simple, but our conversations… and your voice. 
JM: One of the things every parent wants to know is just, how happy are you with your life?
SM: I’m very happy about my life.
JM: I just would like to emphasize — and I want you to hear — how you gave my life, give my life, such meaning.
SM: I will miss having a friend who is unconditionally in love with you… There’s no other relationship that’s the same as that. You can have great friends or loved ones, but it’s not the same.

Close