HOST: When Robert Robinson’s daughter, Angel, started rapidly losing weight… doctors incorrectly diagnosed them with an eating disorder.
But on one visit to the hospital… a doctor on-call discovered a rare stomach tumor.
That doctor, John Fortunato, would stay with the family through Angel’s treatment up until their death in 2023.
At StoryCorps in Chicago, Dr. Fortunato sat down with Angel’s father for this conversation.
John Fortunato (JF) and Robert Robinson (RR)
JF: My first memory of meeting Angel was in the hospital. When I walked in the room, Angel was smiling the whole time. A teenager who was… in control of the room. 
And I remember she told me to push her on her belly and I could make her throw up.
After I diagnosed Angel with the tumor, what was your first response to that?
RR: Before you discovered it, no one would listen to her. Even me.
And… I still regret that. But I didn’t know. 
They were saying it was an eating disorder. And, when you go to the doctor, you’re trusting the professionals. You just, ‘Okay, that’s what the doctor said, that’s what it is.’ So I’m kind of trying to push her, you know what I mean? And it’s not her fault. 
JF: Parents, myself included, don’t always see things clearly, especially as it relates to teenagers. But that doesn’t mean a parent’s doing something wrong. I never tell someone not to feel guilty because that’s not a fair expectation. But, we just do the best we can to support and love our kids. 
 And that’s something that amazed me… you being a single father of twins, and somehow spending an incredible amount of time and energy with both your daughters. 
RR: Nothing else mattered to me but my kids. We couldn’t rely on anybody but each other. It was us against the world type of situation that I feel made her stronger, mentally. 
Cause it’s lot of times I wanted to be like… ‘Well, if you’re gonna die anyway, forget doing this chemo. You can keep your hair.’ And she would, ‘Nah, we don’t give up. I’m gonna keep fighting.’
JF: Sometimes you sink or swim and I got the impression that Angel was not gonna sink under any circumstances.
RR: No, she wasn’t.
JF: I wasn’t ready to give up either. But I realized, you know, after a while… it was a, just, almost impossible situation.
RR: When Angel died, I just remember, standing over her trying to talk to her and her eyes was open but she wasn’t responsive. And her sister was singing to her. And her heart rate was dropping, it was going from 180, it went down to 140. From 140 it went down to 80. From 80 it went down to 40 and… it was over.
JF: I wish that none of this had ever happened to your family but she, um, reminded me kinda what I got into this career to begin with for… and that’s the only regret is I wish I could have told her what her impact was.
RR: And I really appreciate those times, everyone was saying ‘It’s a wrap,’ you know what I mean?
For you to still be there and be like, ‘Nah, there’s still stuff you can do, you ain’t gotta blow the trumpet just yet.’ When a time when there wasn’t any hope, that really lifted us up.
 

CloseVon Diaz: In 2024 NASA decommissioned the Ingenuity Helicopter, the first man-made craft to fly on another planet.
Loay Elbasyouni is a Palestinian American engineer who was part of the team that designed it. 
In 2021 he recorded a StoryCorps Virtual interview with his brother Heissam, about growing up in Gaza, and the moment the copter first took flight.
Loay Elbasyouni (LE): I was at home watching the live feed on the NASA TV. And then they said, “lift off, three feet. Five feet.” It worked. It flew. We made history. 
I feel like I’m part of the Wright Brother team, like, who flew the first time on Earth. Maybe I always was an engineer. You remember our uncle, he’d be like, “Oh I think you should study engineering.” Cause I fixed his radio. Do you remember, like, We created our own TV?
HE: Yeah, yeah right.
LE:  I plug in the Atari into the antenna backwards and then start broadcasting the Atari game over channel three. And then everybody in the neighborhood started watching us playing Atari. [Laughs] Trial and error gets you a long way.
Heissam Elbasyouni (HE): What was the hardest thing to get used to when uh you moved to the United States? 
LE: Hmmm not seeing family. It was really difficult, you know? To be all separated. I guess we never predicted that we cannot go back. But then the situation got really bad back home. Hell, I mean, it’s been 21 years now.
It’s easier to go to Mars than go to Gaza. Cause going to Mars you can calculate everything. It’s all based on science and knowledge. Where going to Gaza, like, the border is always closed, you couldn’t get out. And sometimes I don’t understand why things the way they are. Why would it be so hard?

CloseHOST:
On March 1st, 1954, Rafael Cancel Miranda and 3 other Puerto Rican Nationalists opened fire in the House of Representatives calling for the island’s independence.
Several congressmen were injured and Cancel Miranda served 25 years in prison until President Carter commuted his sentence in 1979.
At StoryCorps, his wife, María de los Ángeles Vázquez and their son, Rafael Cancel Vázquez remembered him.
María de los Ángeles Vázquez (MAV) and Rafael Cancel Vázquez (RCV)
MAV: It was presented to the public that the people that took part in that act were crazy. Rafael was sent to Alcatraz, and they were forgotten.
RCV:  So, how did you meet papá, and how did you fall in love?
MAV: [laughs] Well, it wasn’t until the 70s, that people started talking about these four Puerto Ricans that were imprisoned in the States. They had been in jail already for about 20 years. And there was this big campaign to send a Christmas card to Nationalists. So I sent him a picture of an orchid.
And he wrote back, to my surprise, telling me how thankful he was because he had forgotten that flower pots existed. You know, I thought ‘Gosh this man has been in jail for so many years and he is still moved by a flower pot.’
RCV: When I was growing up there was always orchids at our house.
MAV: Uh huh.
RCV: But I just thought that you loved orchids. I didn’t know that it was very special for him too. 
MAV: Sí.
RCV: You know, when I was a little kid, I had no clue about what Dad did. I just knew that whenever we went somewhere, everybody wanted an autograph, a picture or like, ‘Oh, Don Rafa, it’s an honor to meet you.’ And I was like, ‘Wow, my dad is so cool. He’s cooler than yours.’ [laughs]
MAV: After you learned about March 1st, ‘54, did that change your relationship with your father? 
RCV: Of course, some of the things when I was a little kid then made more sense. He would always be in state of alert. For example, when he would take me to eat, I would always notice that he would sit in a way that he could look at the exit. 
And he would say, ‘Hijo, siempre mira pa todos lados,’ like, ‘Always look everywhere.’
But, he was always so loving and gentle and kind, so I remember asking, like, ‘Dad. How on Earth did you grab a gun and started shooting people?’ And he told me about when he was a little kid…
His mom and dad went out to a march, and one of the police chiefs was like, ‘Shoot to kill.’ So his mom and dad went to a protest dressed in white, and they came back dressed in red, because they had to drag themselves over dead bodies.
That was his first memory.
MAV: How do you think your father would like to be remembered?  
RCV: For me, papá, he was my best friend. But I think he would like to be remembered como un puertorriqueño de los pies a la cabeza. 
MAV: Uh huh.
RCV: As a true Puerto Rican from head to toe, and able to look at himself in the mirror every day and feel respect. 
I think that’s how he would love to be remembered.

Close