Corey Harvard has dedicated his life to helping LGBTQ youth in Mobile, Alabama. 
He grew up in a deeply religious family… and as a queer kid in the 90’s … he struggled to come out to his parents. 
At StoryCorps, he and his mom, Lisa Harvard looked back at that time…
 
Transcript TRT: [2:30]
 
Lisa Harvard (LH) and Corey Harvard (CH)
 
LH: We had no idea, we really didn’t, so we were caught off guard, as you might say. 
 
CH: But, Mom, the amount of stuff I was looking at online when I got the computer, that was just me trying to learn about what it meant to be gay. if y’all were Snoopy parents, it would have taken no time to figure it out. 
 
LH: I remember in that very first conversation, I was looking directly across from you, and you fell into your dad’s arms. I know that I was numb in a lot of ways because a big part of it was feeling separated from you, and I didn’t like that. 
 
CH: Yeah, I remember feeling that distance. I think that with where all of us were, it was inevitable.
 
LH: And during those months and a couple years there, you would come back, we would have more conversations. Of course a lot of it we may not have understood, but it didn’t leave us just reeling, we talked about those things. As we were figuring out what this was going to look like for us. 
 
CH: Mm hmm. 
 
LH: Sometimes I just go into your room, even though we’ve remodeled, we made sure not to touch that room, and I sit on your bed, and I am really so hopeful that it was a good space because I wanted you to be a happy kid.
 
CH: The truth is, I felt so loved as a kid, but, I mean, there’s a part of that journey that no one can join you on.
 
A hard thing that I’ve always wanted to share with you, the beginning of my sophomore year, I was struggling the most. And it was this dark night of the soul where it’s like, can I really accept this? Have I failed at life? And there was that one night that got really hard, and I remember sitting on the windowsill and just contemplating it, like, what would it be like for this to all be over?
 
And this feeling that I had is you, and it’s like this invisible golden lasso. And I knew that even in this worst moment of my life, that I can’t fall. And the work that I do with these kids is how I took that golden lasso and I turned it into a net. And we just keep saving people with that love that you put in me. 
 
LH: Sometimes I look at you and I just can’t fathom the kind of love that I see you give it’s a humbling experience. You came into my life and changed me in so many ways, I’m so much better now than I ever would have been without you…and I’m so grateful to be your mom.
 
BACK ANNOUNCE:
 
​That’s Corey Harvard and his mom Lisa Harvard in Mobile, Alabama.  In 2018, Corey co-founded Prism United, which provides support groups and access to therapy for LGBTQ+ youth and their families in Southwest Alabama. 

CloseHOST (SS): The StoryCorps’ Military Voices Initiative records and shares the stories of service members and their families.
In 1942, in the midst of World War 2, the Marine Corps officially opened its ranks to Black men. 
More than 19,000 Black recruits signed up …  and became known as the Montford Point Marines … Named for the North Carolina base where they trained. 
Most of these men have passed away, but through the StoryCorps Archive … we can still hear their stories … 
Mari Ann Roberts: Do you remember the first time you put on the uniform? 
Estel Roberts: I just felt like, oh, I’m a proud Marine, you know. I thought I was something. 
Benjamin Jenkins: I wanted to help fight for our country, and also show that we had the courage and intelligence to do so. 
William Pickens: We knew we were the best. Well we made it our business to be the best of the best. Not mediocre but the best. 
HOST (SS): We’re going to hear now from Corporal Sidney Allen Francis. 
After serving as one of the first Black Marines… he worked as a New York City police detective… and in 2005 spoke with his daughter, Candice, at StoryCorps.
Sidney Francis (SF): I wanted to go into the Army, but they said no. 
Candice Francis (CF): And this was World War II? 
SF: Yeah. And they stamped my papers ‘Navy,’ and there was no way in the Hell I was going to the Navy.
CF: Why didn’t you want to go in the Navy?
SF: I didn’t like the little hats they were in, the little … [laughs] So then I said, ‘What about the Marine Corps?’ The guy says, ‘Well, you have to go ‘round and see the Sergeant Major.’ First thing he said to me: ‘Are you a high school graduate?’ I said, ‘Yes, sir.’ And I went to North Carolina for boot camp.
CF: And what was that like? 
SF: I mean, they were rough. 
CF: Now, were your drill instructors, were they white or Black? 
SF: No, they were Black. But see, they had trained under white instructors because up to 1942, the Marine Corps had no Blacks. And that’s why they were extra tough on us. They wanted us to make it. And, uh, we did.
Well, I have to tell you, I once went to jail down there. I was with my buddy from New York, he was in the Marine Corps, and we were going to Raleigh from Montford Point. And we’re sitting in the back of the bus. Then the bus stopped to pick up people, and the bus driver came up and he said, uh, ‘You guys will have to get up.’
I said, ‘Get up for what?’ He says, ‘These white people have to sit down.’ I said, ‘We’re in the back of the bus.’ He said, ‘You ought to get up.’ And I lost my head then. I says, ‘We’re not getting up.’ And lo and behold, in not even 10 minutes, in comes police with guns drawn. And they took me that night to some little prison camp. And in the morning I heard, ‘Warden, this is Major Pauper, United States Marine Corps. You got one of my boys in there.’
All the Marines from Montford Point, they were on six by six trucks with machine guns at the ready. You could see they just wanted to tear that jail down. And when I came out, Major Pauper, he says, ‘PFC Francis, you get on that truck. We’re out of here.’
And he hollered it back, ‘Thank you, Warden, that you didn’t hurt one of my Marines.’ He said, ‘You would have been in trouble.’
HOST (SS): That was Sidney Allen Francis speaking with his daughter, Candice. Sidney died February 15, 2014. His daughter recently came back to StoryCorps
Candice: So I didn’t know that story before. He had never shared that with me, but it sounded like my father. I wasn’t surprised by that at all. You know, a lot of Black men who served this country had to also suffer indignities, even while in uniform. I don’t think that they’ve gotten the credit that they deserve for putting their lives in danger.
And coming out of it with scars that didn’t come from the so-called enemy, but came from within. But what I appreciate about my father is that he used his military service to give him what he needed to build a life for himself and his family. It gave him purpose, and it gave him an anchor … And I’m grateful for that. 
***

CF: So what do you want your grandchildren to know about you? 
SF: I want them to just remember that I loved them, that’s all. There’s nothing exciting about me. I’m just a man. 
 
 

CloseVon Diaz: In 2024 NASA decommissioned the Ingenuity Helicopter, the first man-made craft to fly on another planet.
Loay Elbasyouni is a Palestinian American engineer who was part of the team that designed it. 
In 2021 he recorded a StoryCorps Virtual interview with his brother Heissam, about growing up in Gaza, and the moment the copter first took flight.
Loay Elbasyouni (LE): I was at home watching the live feed on the NASA TV. And then they said, “lift off, three feet. Five feet.” It worked. It flew. We made history. 
I feel like I’m part of the Wright Brother team, like, who flew the first time on Earth. Maybe I always was an engineer. You remember our uncle, he’d be like, “Oh I think you should study engineering.” Cause I fixed his radio. Do you remember, like, We created our own TV?
HE: Yeah, yeah right.
LE:  I plug in the Atari into the antenna backwards and then start broadcasting the Atari game over channel three. And then everybody in the neighborhood started watching us playing Atari. [Laughs] Trial and error gets you a long way.
Heissam Elbasyouni (HE): What was the hardest thing to get used to when uh you moved to the United States? 
LE: Hmmm not seeing family. It was really difficult, you know? To be all separated. I guess we never predicted that we cannot go back. But then the situation got really bad back home. Hell, I mean, it’s been 21 years now.
It’s easier to go to Mars than go to Gaza. Cause going to Mars you can calculate everything. It’s all based on science and knowledge. Where going to Gaza, like, the border is always closed, you couldn’t get out. And sometimes I don’t understand why things the way they are. Why would it be so hard?

Close