HOST: Recording booths are places for people to look back on their lives… and sometimes… to look ahead… to a time when they’re no longer here…
That’s the direction that this conversation took…
Conchetta Brown has Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, or C-O-P-D, and uses oxygen…
She came to StoryCorps in San Antonio with her daughter, Nidera. 
Transcript TRT: [2:14]
Nidera Brown (NB) and Conchetta Brown (CB)
NB:  If this was to be your very last conversation, is there anything you want to say to me? 
CB: I love you and I’m sorry I have to die but I have to go, girl. It was good while it lasted, but I must go. 
NB: You act like it’s the ending of a relationship [Laughs].  
CB: It is! 
NB: Well, yeah, I guess it is… but–
CB: Because no more mother and daughter. It’s just daughter, mother gone.
NB: Yeah. But you won’t have to worry about oxygen. 
CB: I know that’s the truth. No more medicine. Oh, to think–
NB: No. You just have to slow down. 
CB: Yeah, I try to do that. And then I forget what I’m doing. 
NB: Well, don’t slow down that much. 
CB: Oh… Well, what about you? What would you do?  
NB: If this was my last conversation?
CB: Yes. 
NB: Yeah, I would tell you the same thing, that I love you. 
CB: Do you want to be cremated?
NB: Yes. 
CB: Oh yeah. And where you want us to throw you? In the toilet, the garbage can? 
NB: No, not the garbage can. All that, it didn’t make no sense to get me cremated [Laughs]. 
CB: Okay, so sorry. 
NB: Just get me cremated and throw me out back?
CB: Yeah [Laughs]. We could use some soil and, you know, plant a tree.
NB: Oh yeah… That would be awesome. 
CB: Uuuhuu.
NB: Something that can give fruit, you know. 
CB: That can give back. 
NB: Yes, give it back. So for your great great grandchild listening to this years from now, is there any wisdom you want to pass on to them?
CB: You know, you don’t have to be religious to believe in something, ‘cause religion is what you do every day. And they got a song that say, ‘You don’t miss your water ‘til your well run dry.’ That’s why you’re supposed to treat people kind while they’re alive. 
NB: Yeah.
CB: And when your well dry, you want to see that person again. But it’s all over. 
NB: Yup.
CB: You know, we made do girl… Eventually, I’ve gotta go. And I know it’s gonna break your heart. I’ll be sad that I’m gone ‘cause I won’t have you to talk to. 
But it’s gonna be alright. I’mma always be with you, here.

CloseVon Diaz: And now – a love letter to a family, recorded during a father’s final days. 
Sohaib Sultan was a Muslim Chaplain at Princeton University. And in 2020, he was diagnosed with terminal cancer.
He wanted to record with his wife Arshe to leave something behind for their 3 year old daughter Radiyya, who they adopted from Pakistan.
Sohaib Sultan (SS) and Arshe Ahmed (AA)
SS: You and I would stay up till 12 o’clock at night, waiting to make that phone call to Pakistan, reminding them that we were inquiring about a child. And they would always say, ‘There’s no child for you.’ You know, I’ve wanted to be a father since I was a little kid. And I think hearing those words night after night, it was sad.
But, the moment they said, ‘We have a baby for you,’ I just remember this feeling of joy. 
AA: Yeah. Seeing her for the first time and holding her was just the most gorgeous moment of my life.
So, do you remember the day when you got your full diagnosis?
SS: They called and they said, ‘You probably have a year to live.’ But It didn’t feel like all bad news. 
AA: Hmm.
SS: Like, think about the 40 years that God has given me. What a beautiful life. What a purposeful life. What a blessed life.
But, Radiyya is always asking, ‘Are you better now?’ You know, I say, ‘Abba is not going to get better.’ And when she says, ‘But then I’ll cry and I’ll cry.’ I remember saying to her, ‘Aap insaan ho. Ronaa theek hay.’ You’re a human being, so it’s okay to cry, to be sad.
And you’ve told me that one of the hardest things you imagine is explaining to her where I am. 
AA: Yeah, When she wakes up in the morning and she looks over to our bed and says, ‘Where’s Abba?’ And you’re in the bathroom. I can’t but think about that moment when I’m going to have to answer that differently. That’s going to be a hard one for me. 
SS: You know, I feel a lot of sorrow in my heart thinking about that moment. 
AA: Yeah.
SS: But, even though I won’t be there physically, just know that I’ll be there spiritually. You won’t be alone.
So many people have said, ‘We’re praying for a miracle.’ But I always chuckle at that because I feel like my entire life has been a miracle. And one of them is finding you. 
What you’ve done for me, waking up in the middle of the night, almost every night for the past three months, because I’m in pain. Those are the things that I hope Radiyya really knows, that that’s how you took care of me.
AA: Yeah. You know I’m just grateful for each moment that we get.
SS: My hope is that Radiyya will live life beautifully, no matter how long God gives her. And you are especially going to teach her what it means to take life as a gift and to live it out every day.

CloseHOST (SS): The StoryCorps’ Military Voices Initiative records and shares the stories of service members and their families.
In 1942, in the midst of World War 2, the Marine Corps officially opened its ranks to Black men. 
More than 19,000 Black recruits signed up …  and became known as the Montford Point Marines … Named for the North Carolina base where they trained. 
Most of these men have passed away, but through the StoryCorps Archive … we can still hear their stories … 
Mari Ann Roberts: Do you remember the first time you put on the uniform? 
Estel Roberts: I just felt like, oh, I’m a proud Marine, you know. I thought I was something. 
Benjamin Jenkins: I wanted to help fight for our country, and also show that we had the courage and intelligence to do so. 
William Pickens: We knew we were the best. Well we made it our business to be the best of the best. Not mediocre but the best. 
HOST (SS): We’re going to hear now from Corporal Sidney Allen Francis. 
After serving as one of the first Black Marines… he worked as a New York City police detective… and in 2005 spoke with his daughter, Candice, at StoryCorps.
Sidney Francis (SF): I wanted to go into the Army, but they said no. 
Candice Francis (CF): And this was World War II? 
SF: Yeah. And they stamped my papers ‘Navy,’ and there was no way in the Hell I was going to the Navy.
CF: Why didn’t you want to go in the Navy?
SF: I didn’t like the little hats they were in, the little … [laughs] So then I said, ‘What about the Marine Corps?’ The guy says, ‘Well, you have to go ‘round and see the Sergeant Major.’ First thing he said to me: ‘Are you a high school graduate?’ I said, ‘Yes, sir.’ And I went to North Carolina for boot camp.
CF: And what was that like? 
SF: I mean, they were rough. 
CF: Now, were your drill instructors, were they white or Black? 
SF: No, they were Black. But see, they had trained under white instructors because up to 1942, the Marine Corps had no Blacks. And that’s why they were extra tough on us. They wanted us to make it. And, uh, we did.
Well, I have to tell you, I once went to jail down there. I was with my buddy from New York, he was in the Marine Corps, and we were going to Raleigh from Montford Point. And we’re sitting in the back of the bus. Then the bus stopped to pick up people, and the bus driver came up and he said, uh, ‘You guys will have to get up.’
I said, ‘Get up for what?’ He says, ‘These white people have to sit down.’ I said, ‘We’re in the back of the bus.’ He said, ‘You ought to get up.’ And I lost my head then. I says, ‘We’re not getting up.’ And lo and behold, in not even 10 minutes, in comes police with guns drawn. And they took me that night to some little prison camp. And in the morning I heard, ‘Warden, this is Major Pauper, United States Marine Corps. You got one of my boys in there.’
All the Marines from Montford Point, they were on six by six trucks with machine guns at the ready. You could see they just wanted to tear that jail down. And when I came out, Major Pauper, he says, ‘PFC Francis, you get on that truck. We’re out of here.’
And he hollered it back, ‘Thank you, Warden, that you didn’t hurt one of my Marines.’ He said, ‘You would have been in trouble.’
HOST (SS): That was Sidney Allen Francis speaking with his daughter, Candice. Sidney died February 15, 2014. His daughter recently came back to StoryCorps
Candice: So I didn’t know that story before. He had never shared that with me, but it sounded like my father. I wasn’t surprised by that at all. You know, a lot of Black men who served this country had to also suffer indignities, even while in uniform. I don’t think that they’ve gotten the credit that they deserve for putting their lives in danger.
And coming out of it with scars that didn’t come from the so-called enemy, but came from within. But what I appreciate about my father is that he used his military service to give him what he needed to build a life for himself and his family. It gave him purpose, and it gave him an anchor … And I’m grateful for that. 
***

CF: So what do you want your grandchildren to know about you? 
SF: I want them to just remember that I loved them, that’s all. There’s nothing exciting about me. I’m just a man. 
 
 

Close