Tchin <<chin>> is an artist and metalsmith. He’s created designs for brands like Cartier <<CAR-tee-yay>>.
He belongs to the Narragansett tribe. Growing up, he moved between foster homes in Rhode Island and Virginia.  
And as he told his daughter Xiao Hui Star <<shah-way-star>>, he was often one of the few Indigenous people in town.
Transcript TRT: [3:18]
 
Tchin (T) and Xiao Hui Star (XS)
T: I looked different than everybody else. There was either white people or Black people, and there was me. And so, I stood out. And the cops would stop me sometimes, even as a young kid, they would stop me and go, ‘You know, you don’t belong in this neighborhood.’
I was living in Rhode Island and Rhode Island School of Design had a, like, summer scholarships. So I entered the competition and the art teacher said, ‘They don’t want people like you.’ And uh, I stopped drawing ever since then. 
XS: Wow. 
T: Yeah. It, it, it hurt. 
XS: How old were you?
T: I might’ve been 13. 
XS: Hmm. 
T: And, uh, people would say, like, ‘You know, you’re gonna end up in jail,’ or, ‘You’re not gonna ever become anything’ or anything like that. And I was, ‘I’m gonna prove them wrong. I need to go somewhere. I need more than this.’ And I went to New York. And I slept in hallways, and I slept in the subways, and I slept in Grand Central Station.
I really couldn’t read and write very well, and, uh, when I did have jobs, I usually weren’t able to keep those jobs. And then I learned to read and write by forcing myself to read an encyclopedia. And I applied to go to an art school.
XS: I would like to hear more about how you built the confidence to pursue an artistic career, which I see as quite risky. 
T: It was a little scary, but because Mommy did so much supporting us, it wasn’t as scary as if I was the only breadwinner. And my joke was always that I did all the cooking and the sewing. And Mommy did the brickwork and the plumbing. 
And when you girls were growing up, I made it a point that we would always have family meals on the weekend. And I wanted to raise my girls as really strong, powerful women. I would always say, ‘What can I do? As a parent, to make your life better?’ You girls would say, ‘I didn’t like when you raised your voice.’ And then I would learn to not be so tough on you. But you’re navigating the world very well, all of you.
XS: I’m 38, the age that you were when you had me. What advice do you have for me? 
T: The sad thing about human beings is that we tend to remember the unhappy things. And I think my advice to you is just try to be happy. The longest life is short.
 
BACK ANNOUNCE:
 
For StoryCorps in Philadelphia, that’s Tchin and Xiao Hui Star.
Their conversation is archived in the Library of Congress.

CloseAnnie Russell: Miranda Duschack and Mimo Davis’ have been farming together since 2012, supplying flowers in the St. Louis area.
At StoryCorps Miranda and Mimo told their own love story as the first lesbian couple married in Missouri. 
Miranda Duschack (MD) and Mimo Davis (MIM) 
MD: We met at work.
MIM: Right.
MD: At our day job. And then we decided to farm together…fell in love, got married, at a spiritual ceremony where we jumped the broom because we couldn’t legally be married. 
And then the second wedding was in 2014 to be legally married.
MIM: Right.
MD: Do you remember this? When we had August.  Do you remember how I pushed August out, ok…
MIM: What do you mean, do I remember that?
MD: Yeah. But they didn’t know how to fill out the birth certificate.
MIM: I do remember that.
MD: So, I was making a fact sheet to leave at the nurse’s station about how to register. Um…
MIM: It’s okay. It’s okay. You can have you some tears.
MD: I just felt like we were total freaks, man.
MIM: We weren’t freaks, we were just firsts.
MD: We were just first. And it was really embarrassing for me that we fought so hard to get married and then we got divorced. 
MIM: But, you know, that was part of the rights that we fought for.
MD: I know. I mean, I would say that to people, You know, it…
MIM: And that’s all part of the package, right? You get to be married and then you get to be divorced. I mean…
MD: Right. I was like, just like straight people. 
MIM:: Just like straight people [laughs] Right. 
MD: I can get divorced. I can get divorced. It didn’t necessarily pan out the way we thought it would be…
MIM: But we’re still in it. We’re still farming partners.
MD: We’re raising a beautiful son. These are gorgeous flowers sitting in front of us. And Mimo Davis, I’m going to say right now, I still really love you and care about you.
MIM: Of course, of course, I love you and care about you too. I mean that was never in question for me. We are both really, in our hearts and souls and deep down, totally committed to each other, and that’s why we work through all the real stuff. And I see that as a win.

CloseVon Diaz: And now – a love letter to a family, recorded during a father’s final days. 
Sohaib Sultan was a Muslim Chaplain at Princeton University. And in 2020, he was diagnosed with terminal cancer.
He wanted to record with his wife Arshe to leave something behind for their 3 year old daughter Radiyya, who they adopted from Pakistan.
Sohaib Sultan (SS) and Arshe Ahmed (AA)
SS: You and I would stay up till 12 o’clock at night, waiting to make that phone call to Pakistan, reminding them that we were inquiring about a child. And they would always say, ‘There’s no child for you.’ You know, I’ve wanted to be a father since I was a little kid. And I think hearing those words night after night, it was sad.
But, the moment they said, ‘We have a baby for you,’ I just remember this feeling of joy. 
AA: Yeah. Seeing her for the first time and holding her was just the most gorgeous moment of my life.
So, do you remember the day when you got your full diagnosis?
SS: They called and they said, ‘You probably have a year to live.’ But It didn’t feel like all bad news. 
AA: Hmm.
SS: Like, think about the 40 years that God has given me. What a beautiful life. What a purposeful life. What a blessed life.
But, Radiyya is always asking, ‘Are you better now?’ You know, I say, ‘Abba is not going to get better.’ And when she says, ‘But then I’ll cry and I’ll cry.’ I remember saying to her, ‘Aap insaan ho. Ronaa theek hay.’ You’re a human being, so it’s okay to cry, to be sad.
And you’ve told me that one of the hardest things you imagine is explaining to her where I am. 
AA: Yeah, When she wakes up in the morning and she looks over to our bed and says, ‘Where’s Abba?’ And you’re in the bathroom. I can’t but think about that moment when I’m going to have to answer that differently. That’s going to be a hard one for me. 
SS: You know, I feel a lot of sorrow in my heart thinking about that moment. 
AA: Yeah.
SS: But, even though I won’t be there physically, just know that I’ll be there spiritually. You won’t be alone.
So many people have said, ‘We’re praying for a miracle.’ But I always chuckle at that because I feel like my entire life has been a miracle. And one of them is finding you. 
What you’ve done for me, waking up in the middle of the night, almost every night for the past three months, because I’m in pain. Those are the things that I hope Radiyya really knows, that that’s how you took care of me.
AA: Yeah. You know I’m just grateful for each moment that we get.
SS: My hope is that Radiyya will live life beautifully, no matter how long God gives her. And you are especially going to teach her what it means to take life as a gift and to live it out every day.

Close