HOST: In 1931, a young Native Hawaiian man, Joseph Kahahawai, was wrongfully accused of sexually assaulting the wife of a U.S. Navy officer …  Soon after, he was killed by her relatives.
Kim Farrant is his niece. But growing up, her family never spoke about her uncle.
At StoryCorps in Honolulu, she told her sister …  Joy Kahahawai-Welch … how she first heard the story.
 
Transcript
KF: I was in a Hawaiian history class in middle school and one of the topics was a very tragic story of a young man who was falsely accused of raping a woman and then the family kidnapped and murdered him. And they were never brought to justice.
This man had the very same name as our dad: Joseph Kahahawai. The teacher then asked me, ‘Is this your family?’ So I came home and I asked mom and she said, ‘Yeah. That is dad’s brother.’
He had just turned 23 years old right before he was killed. And then our dad was born just 11 months later. He inherited the very same name. So Dad was the new Joe… and he became the star of our family. He was like the sun that we all revolved around.
I think he knew that they wanted the name and the legacy to live on.
JK: You know… Dad innately carried himself a certain way to make his brother proud. And I remember wanting to hear more about what happened. But the gist of it was, ‘It’s just too hard to talk about.’
KF: Right. I look back and I think, ‘Oh, is there something to be ashamed of?’ But that first generation needed those years of silence and peace to heal and recover.
And it made us all hold each other more close and more dear … Like we’re this unbroken chain of family. 
JK: We pay our uncle our respects by going to the cemetery, you know? Taking care of it. 
KF: It’s a humble cemetery in the middle of Kalihi. And the plumeria tree above his grave has a lot of flowers. So fresh flowers are raining down on him daily right now. 
JK: ‘Ho’omana’o’ is on his gravestone and that’s a good reminder to never forget. Always remember.

CloseHOST: When Robert Robinson’s daughter, Angel, started rapidly losing weight… doctors incorrectly diagnosed them with an eating disorder.
But on one visit to the hospital… a doctor on-call discovered a rare stomach tumor.
That doctor, John Fortunato, would stay with the family through Angel’s treatment up until their death in 2023.
At StoryCorps in Chicago, Dr. Fortunato sat down with Angel’s father for this conversation.
John Fortunato (JF) and Robert Robinson (RR)
JF: My first memory of meeting Angel was in the hospital. When I walked in the room, Angel was smiling the whole time. A teenager who was… in control of the room. 
And I remember she told me to push her on her belly and I could make her throw up.
After I diagnosed Angel with the tumor, what was your first response to that?
RR: Before you discovered it, no one would listen to her. Even me.
And… I still regret that. But I didn’t know. 
They were saying it was an eating disorder. And, when you go to the doctor, you’re trusting the professionals. You just, ‘Okay, that’s what the doctor said, that’s what it is.’ So I’m kind of trying to push her, you know what I mean? And it’s not her fault. 
JF: Parents, myself included, don’t always see things clearly, especially as it relates to teenagers. But that doesn’t mean a parent’s doing something wrong. I never tell someone not to feel guilty because that’s not a fair expectation. But, we just do the best we can to support and love our kids. 
 And that’s something that amazed me… you being a single father of twins, and somehow spending an incredible amount of time and energy with both your daughters. 
RR: Nothing else mattered to me but my kids. We couldn’t rely on anybody but each other. It was us against the world type of situation that I feel made her stronger, mentally. 
Cause it’s lot of times I wanted to be like… ‘Well, if you’re gonna die anyway, forget doing this chemo. You can keep your hair.’ And she would, ‘Nah, we don’t give up. I’m gonna keep fighting.’
JF: Sometimes you sink or swim and I got the impression that Angel was not gonna sink under any circumstances.
RR: No, she wasn’t.
JF: I wasn’t ready to give up either. But I realized, you know, after a while… it was a, just, almost impossible situation.
RR: When Angel died, I just remember, standing over her trying to talk to her and her eyes was open but she wasn’t responsive. And her sister was singing to her. And her heart rate was dropping, it was going from 180, it went down to 140. From 140 it went down to 80. From 80 it went down to 40 and… it was over.
JF: I wish that none of this had ever happened to your family but she, um, reminded me kinda what I got into this career to begin with for… and that’s the only regret is I wish I could have told her what her impact was.
RR: And I really appreciate those times, everyone was saying ‘It’s a wrap,’ you know what I mean?
For you to still be there and be like, ‘Nah, there’s still stuff you can do, you ain’t gotta blow the trumpet just yet.’ When a time when there wasn’t any hope, that really lifted us up.
 

CloseAnnie Russell: Miranda Duschack and Mimo Davis’ have been farming together since 2012, supplying flowers in the St. Louis area.
At StoryCorps Miranda and Mimo told their own love story as the first lesbian couple married in Missouri. 
Miranda Duschack (MD) and Mimo Davis (MIM) 
MD: We met at work.
MIM: Right.
MD: At our day job. And then we decided to farm together…fell in love, got married, at a spiritual ceremony where we jumped the broom because we couldn’t legally be married. 
And then the second wedding was in 2014 to be legally married.
MIM: Right.
MD: Do you remember this? When we had August.  Do you remember how I pushed August out, ok…
MIM: What do you mean, do I remember that?
MD: Yeah. But they didn’t know how to fill out the birth certificate.
MIM: I do remember that.
MD: So, I was making a fact sheet to leave at the nurse’s station about how to register. Um…
MIM: It’s okay. It’s okay. You can have you some tears.
MD: I just felt like we were total freaks, man.
MIM: We weren’t freaks, we were just firsts.
MD: We were just first. And it was really embarrassing for me that we fought so hard to get married and then we got divorced. 
MIM: But, you know, that was part of the rights that we fought for.
MD: I know. I mean, I would say that to people, You know, it…
MIM: And that’s all part of the package, right? You get to be married and then you get to be divorced. I mean…
MD: Right. I was like, just like straight people. 
MIM:: Just like straight people [laughs] Right. 
MD: I can get divorced. I can get divorced. It didn’t necessarily pan out the way we thought it would be…
MIM: But we’re still in it. We’re still farming partners.
MD: We’re raising a beautiful son. These are gorgeous flowers sitting in front of us. And Mimo Davis, I’m going to say right now, I still really love you and care about you.
MIM: Of course, of course, I love you and care about you too. I mean that was never in question for me. We are both really, in our hearts and souls and deep down, totally committed to each other, and that’s why we work through all the real stuff. And I see that as a win.

Close