CloseCorey Harvard has dedicated his life to helping LGBTQ youth in Mobile, Alabama. 
He grew up in a deeply religious family… and as a queer kid in the 90’s … he struggled to come out to his parents. 
At StoryCorps, he and his mom, Lisa Harvard looked back at that time…
 
Transcript TRT: [2:30]
 
Lisa Harvard (LH) and Corey Harvard (CH)
 
LH: We had no idea, we really didn’t, so we were caught off guard, as you might say. 
 
CH: But, Mom, the amount of stuff I was looking at online when I got the computer, that was just me trying to learn about what it meant to be gay. if y’all were Snoopy parents, it would have taken no time to figure it out. 
 
LH: I remember in that very first conversation, I was looking directly across from you, and you fell into your dad’s arms. I know that I was numb in a lot of ways because a big part of it was feeling separated from you, and I didn’t like that. 
 
CH: Yeah, I remember feeling that distance. I think that with where all of us were, it was inevitable.
 
LH: And during those months and a couple years there, you would come back, we would have more conversations. Of course a lot of it we may not have understood, but it didn’t leave us just reeling, we talked about those things. As we were figuring out what this was going to look like for us. 
 
CH: Mm hmm. 
 
LH: Sometimes I just go into your room, even though we’ve remodeled, we made sure not to touch that room, and I sit on your bed, and I am really so hopeful that it was a good space because I wanted you to be a happy kid.
 
CH: The truth is, I felt so loved as a kid, but, I mean, there’s a part of that journey that no one can join you on.
 
A hard thing that I’ve always wanted to share with you, the beginning of my sophomore year, I was struggling the most. And it was this dark night of the soul where it’s like, can I really accept this? Have I failed at life? And there was that one night that got really hard, and I remember sitting on the windowsill and just contemplating it, like, what would it be like for this to all be over?
 
And this feeling that I had is you, and it’s like this invisible golden lasso. And I knew that even in this worst moment of my life, that I can’t fall. And the work that I do with these kids is how I took that golden lasso and I turned it into a net. And we just keep saving people with that love that you put in me. 
 
LH: Sometimes I look at you and I just can’t fathom the kind of love that I see you give it’s a humbling experience. You came into my life and changed me in so many ways, I’m so much better now than I ever would have been without you…and I’m so grateful to be your mom.
 
BACK ANNOUNCE:
 
​That’s Corey Harvard and his mom Lisa Harvard in Mobile, Alabama.  In 2018, Corey co-founded Prism United, which provides support groups and access to therapy for LGBTQ+ youth and their families in Southwest Alabama. 

CloseHOST: When Robert Robinson’s daughter, Angel, started rapidly losing weight… doctors incorrectly diagnosed them with an eating disorder.
But on one visit to the hospital… a doctor on-call discovered a rare stomach tumor.
That doctor, John Fortunato, would stay with the family through Angel’s treatment up until their death in 2023.
At StoryCorps in Chicago, Dr. Fortunato sat down with Angel’s father for this conversation.
John Fortunato (JF) and Robert Robinson (RR)
JF: My first memory of meeting Angel was in the hospital. When I walked in the room, Angel was smiling the whole time. A teenager who was… in control of the room. 
And I remember she told me to push her on her belly and I could make her throw up.
After I diagnosed Angel with the tumor, what was your first response to that?
RR: Before you discovered it, no one would listen to her. Even me.
And… I still regret that. But I didn’t know. 
They were saying it was an eating disorder. And, when you go to the doctor, you’re trusting the professionals. You just, ‘Okay, that’s what the doctor said, that’s what it is.’ So I’m kind of trying to push her, you know what I mean? And it’s not her fault. 
JF: Parents, myself included, don’t always see things clearly, especially as it relates to teenagers. But that doesn’t mean a parent’s doing something wrong. I never tell someone not to feel guilty because that’s not a fair expectation. But, we just do the best we can to support and love our kids. 
 And that’s something that amazed me… you being a single father of twins, and somehow spending an incredible amount of time and energy with both your daughters. 
RR: Nothing else mattered to me but my kids. We couldn’t rely on anybody but each other. It was us against the world type of situation that I feel made her stronger, mentally. 
Cause it’s lot of times I wanted to be like… ‘Well, if you’re gonna die anyway, forget doing this chemo. You can keep your hair.’ And she would, ‘Nah, we don’t give up. I’m gonna keep fighting.’
JF: Sometimes you sink or swim and I got the impression that Angel was not gonna sink under any circumstances.
RR: No, she wasn’t.
JF: I wasn’t ready to give up either. But I realized, you know, after a while… it was a, just, almost impossible situation.
RR: When Angel died, I just remember, standing over her trying to talk to her and her eyes was open but she wasn’t responsive. And her sister was singing to her. And her heart rate was dropping, it was going from 180, it went down to 140. From 140 it went down to 80. From 80 it went down to 40 and… it was over.
JF: I wish that none of this had ever happened to your family but she, um, reminded me kinda what I got into this career to begin with for… and that’s the only regret is I wish I could have told her what her impact was.
RR: And I really appreciate those times, everyone was saying ‘It’s a wrap,’ you know what I mean?
For you to still be there and be like, ‘Nah, there’s still stuff you can do, you ain’t gotta blow the trumpet just yet.’ When a time when there wasn’t any hope, that really lifted us up.
 

Close